2000 - Dec. - 17
Written by Kevin Dorner
mrkevvy@home.com
Downloaded from http://members.home.com/mrkevvy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
		
The Unexpurgated Journal Of Elmonster - Mage Of The Realms: A Baldur's Gate 2 Walkthrough & Fan-Fiction

Impossible to finish Baldur's Gate 2 with a capped, solo mage without cheating? (Well...one cheat...an empty bag.) Not impossible. This is a path definitely not recommended for those too impatient to learn exactly what all those spells do, or suffer through some very slow battles, but I did it, so you could too. Remember always that your intelligence and wit will outdo the cruel, mechanical logic of your enemies every time, and you shall be victorious.

After finishing Baldur's Gate II with several different characters (twice solo with an elven Fighter/Mage/Thief exported from BG1) I thought that this would be the ultimate test of magery, game knowledge, patience and prowess...and was inspired to it after finding and exploring the powers and possibilities of the Staff Of The Magi, without which of course this would have been far more difficult or very nearly impossible.

Follow my journal and I shall detail to you just what "impossible" means.

Prologue
--------
Elmonster is a Lawful Neutral human mage, exported from Baldur's Gate 1. Stats:
Str. 19, Int 19, Dex. 19, Con. 19, Wis. 12, Chr. 13

Yes, superhuman, but without cheating. You do remember all those lovely tomes in Baldur's Gate 1? They were there for a reason. The developers did say they unbalanced the game a bit. For a mage such as myself, the 19 Int. was the most important statistic; this enables me to have unlimited spells in my spellbook, though I am constrained by the rules fair Mystra has imposed on we spellcasters as are others for memorization. If only my enemies were!

There was one tome for each statistic, except Wisdom. There were three for that...those of magery can tend to be a little unwise at times. I am glad of these tomes. I still had to roll stats. for two hours to be able to put four 18's into important stats. and reasonable numbers in less important ones, but I think you will agree it paid off in the long run.

Why does a mage need dexterity anyways? Well, if he is to survive, he had best not be hit, and an 18 dexterity gives a 4 bonus to his Armour Class as well as helping his performance with his sling or darts. His high Constitution gives him the hit points needed to survive, and high strength is required for lifting all those items he will find, And like it or not, if he is alone he will become involved in melee combat quite often and had best be able to deal damage with his staff...strength is paramount for this as mages can never gain weapon proficiencies that increase the amount of damage or improve the hit chances; the best a mage can do is to use a weapon without penalty and all other modifiers must come through strength, the weapon's enchantment, THAC0 and luck. As well, without a thief to open locked chests and doors for him, he had best be able to force the important ones or become stuck if he doesn't have the Knock spell.

Day 1
-----
I awaken imprisoned in the underground laboratory of one of those annoying mages who just flings spells around like confetti at a wedding and disregards all the memorization rules. Sigh...I can tell he's going to be an enemy because of that. He quickly confirms this by using me as target practice. How wonderful to wake up to being tortured by madmen. I don't know what he has done to me before this, but I have forgotten all the spells I knew.

Some teenaged girl arrives (do I remember her from Candlekeep? I think she was from there too) and claims that she knows me, but I travel alone, so brush her off. There are two other annoying people in cages as well...a haughty druid, and an obnoxiously loud ranger. I free them but though they wish to cling to my presence (why do these pathetic souls do so?) unfortunately my privacy and independence are of paramount importance.

My initial spells are: Dire Charm, Chromatic Orb, Find Familiar, Spook, Blur, Detect Invisibility, Invisibility, Dire Charm, Minor Spell Deflection and Stoneskin.

I rest immediately to memorize spells. Now, I finally can have a companion worthwhile. I cast Find Familiar. My new ferret friend is 50% magic resistant, has a 0 Armor Class, and 75% Pick Pockets, 40% Stealth, and 20% Find Traps abilities (Good for starting but I won't be relying on that too much.) She will keep me safe, and from being broke. I am sure to return this favour, so I can remove Find Familiar and memorize something else now. If I am to value her companionship and keep her safe, she will need a name so that I think of her as someone worth protecting. My namesake's scribe and companion is Lhaeo, and I've often heard the name "Lazarus" for someone who was conjured forth. I will call her "Lhaeozarus."

And she does keep me safe, finding several traps. While she can't disarm them, I can use spells such as Minor Spell Deflection and my Slow Poison ability to avoid their effects. I know, were I a thief, that I could gain a lot of experience for disarming them.

Such a shame...soon I hope to be a force in the Realms, and here I am getting kicked around by simple mephits and goblins! My tutor would have had my hide for such lax magery. My greatest triumph today comes in the form of two Lesser Golems. They would prove an imposing obstacle to most. Noticing that they are "idle" I surmise that they must be guarding something, something I probably want; I won't give them the pleasure of surprising me. I cast Stoneskin and Monster Summoning II. Two gnolls appear. I set them on the golems one at a time. The golems' force is wasted on the gnolls while I take them down with the magical quarterstaff +1 that I found in a trapped box, and paid a price of lightning for as well.

My spells exhausted and my body hurt and aching, I rest again.

I dream...a dream I cannot see but I know it is true...I feel it. There is a Staff Of The Magi near this place! Somewhere...close by here. It is probably formidably guarded, but I shall not rest from this goal. If I am to accomplish any mission, it is a necessity.

Day 2-4
-------
Still poking around this dungeon on its second level. There were a few difficult encounters but have survived them. A Bounty Hunter thief from Kara-Tua appeared to want to join up with me, and I was tempted knowing of how many traps I would have to stomp on, but something about his demeanor convinced me to do otherwise. He seemed a little too eager, and his story of suddenly waking up here after falling asleep in a room at an inn did not convince me. I know why I am here; my captor indicated that "...you have such potential..." Obviously he knows I am a child of Bhaal and is probably trying to use this for his benefit somehow. The thief would not have been here without a reason that he knew, and did not want to tell me.

I managed to defeat some Mephit Portals by summoning a gnoll and dire wolf to distract the mephits while I whacked the portals. Also found a nice pair of Bracers Of Defense AC 8. While I hope to have a much better pair soon, I will take what I can and any improvement is welcome. A rather tricky mage had escaped from her jar; rather than waiting for her to attack me, I stunned her with Chromatic Orb where she stood and pounded her into a well-deserved oblivion. She yielded one of six strange keys. By far the most annoying opponents are those mephits, though.

Finally, a doppelganger, some thieves and a few Duergar later. I leave the dungeon. I have six unidentified wands...well, correct that, I know what they are. I don't want to waste Identify scrolls on them though. I am reading back over my journal and note a lack of detail caused by my disorientation and loss of memory. I will correct this for later entries and try to be more thorough in my accounts if this is to mean anything to me in future.

Day 5
-----
At long last, out in the open air, who should greet me but that confetti spell-tosser and the teenaged girl again. He pulps some thieves, and then a few other mages show up. They throw random spells at each other as if they didn't have to memorize them, but in the end Mr. Confetti is victorious. For some reason he surrenders to them and they take him and the teenager. She calls out for help, but I really couldn't care less about her right now. I am alone in a city where, it seems from the comments of the mages, that magic is illegal, and I have little else...I will have to use every scrap of wit I can to survive.

My first task is to sell off all of the useless weapons, armour and other knickknacks I picked up in the dungeon. I need money to survive, and I may need a lot more of it than I can hope to find here, even with my familiar's pickpocketing. I will have some lean times.

I feel like resting, so visit a nearby Inn. On the second floor, a tough group of nasties start taunting me. There is a human mage and his imp familiar, a dwarven warrior with a hammer, a human warrior with a two-handed sword, and a human thief. Though I am weak, alone, and injured in a city where I cannot put my only strength to use, I will not stand for that sort of treatment. I cast Fireball into the centre of the room... and no wizards arrive to arrest me. I have learned something! Magic may be monitored here, but those who do can only see outdoor spellcasting. Immediately the group attacks me. I hightail it out of there. Little do I know that the sudden force of my attack has caused the thief to turn berserk; I will have one less opponent to deal with than I had planned on. The human warrior follows me out of the inn, and suddenly, though he is armoured and equipped with a powerful two-handed sword, I am at the advantage: he does not have a ranged weapon. I run him around and around a strange machine in the centre of what I know now to be called Waukeen's Promenade, never allowing him within sword reach, and attacking him with my sling when he is far enough behind me. Ten minutes later he is dead. I know immediately upon retrieving his sword its name and history: it is the two-handed +3 cursed berserking sword placed in my hands by Captain Bragh of the Amnish guard of the border town of Nashkel, after I lifted its curse from him by correctly answering his riddle. The poor man was distraught, having murdered his family and others while influenced by this weapon, and I had shown him safely to the temple of Helm, whose kind and wise priest knew the real reason behind Bragh's actions, and gave him sanctuary.  I would forevermore respect the priests of Helm and their god for this insight into their character. I had sold the sword at the nearby shop, and it had returned to haunt me.

I still have remaining opponents. The Imp proves to be difficult. It has followed me onto the streets and casts several spells at me. No wizards arrive to stop it! How bloody unfair! It appears that they are all just watching ME and waiting for ME to cast a spell before pouncing. I make a silent vow to never befriend these rogues guised as law and order; if the law is not upheld equivalently it is worthless, as are its upholders. I pound the imp to putty with my slightly magical quarterstaff and re-enter the inn. The next opponent to make the foolish mistake of following me out of the inn is the dwarf. Though he never gets a hit on me, he proves to be the most difficult of all, as it turns out that he is wearing Full Plate armour and has about 200 hit points. I exhaust my sling bullets on him and have to run out in the middle of the battle to buy more of them. Even worse, he has three Potions Of Extra Healing, and drinks one whenever he gets Badly Injured. Only 15% of my sling bullets strike him. Two hours and 400 bullets (and four dead Amnish guards that got in his way) later, he falls. I collect his useless but saleable Full Plate with a tired feeling of triumph, but dreading what still lies ahead.

My fears are unfounded. The thief has killed the mage in his berserk state, and is the last of the opponents to remain. I cast Stoneskin and his backstab merely takes out a stoneskin. His flexible leather armour is weak against my quarterstaff, and in seconds he is fleeing the battle. I collect the possessions of the dead mage, and I have found a treasure...worth only a few hundred gold pieces but priceless in its use, its lifesaving ability, to me: the Cloak Of Non-Detection, a must for the invisible mage who wishes to stay that way! It makes my desire for the Staff and the invisibility it provides all the more powerful.

Day 6
-----
There is a guard in front of a circus tent here in the Promenade who tells me that the circus has been taken over, and no one has come out again. I could investigate it, but not in my present condition...hoping I am making the right decision, I spend over 11,000 gold pieces from all the items I collected at the Adventure Mart nearby and buy two items that I require: a magical +2 sling, and Bracers Of Defense AC 3. These bracers I know are the best of their kind; I will never find better, and they are an absolute necessity for one who can't wear armour. They turn out to be a wise investment: the circus has been taken over by a mad Illusionist gnome, and filled with shadows and werewolves. I can now go toe-to-toe with a werewolf (though two are a little difficult) with my new bracers protecting me, and shadows are a pushover. They occasionally drain my strength even through a Stoneskin, but I just wait a short time for it to go back up again. My Armor Class is now -2 with the Ring Of Protection I found in the dungeon in a statue, the bracers, and my high dexterity.

Even better than all of this, my wonderful familiar has pickpocketed the storekeeper at the Adventure Mart for a truly useful item: a Ring Of Regeneration. I can now heal spontaneously though slowly. I will never run out of healing potions or have to purchase healing at a temple again. As long as I can survive a battle by any tiny amount, I can just stand around until fully healed. Boring, but necessary.

When I dispose of the fiendish gnome who usurped the circus, he drops a nice belt that improves my armor class by 3 against piercing weapons (like bolts and arrows) and a Ring Of Human Influence that puts my average Charisma up to 18. This is very good; now I will get a nice discount whenever I buy anything, especially if I cast Friends first, and will also help with general conversation helping me to get a favourable response. He also drops a few spell scrolls that I read or sell.

Day 7
-----
I visit the Bridge District, where I learn of the "Skinner Murders", and the Temple District. In the Bridge District's Five Flagons inn, I stop to watch a play, and end up being given the task to rescue a kidnapped actor from a wizard. This leads me to the temple district, where I find out about a cult called the Unseeing Eye and the Temple Of Helm asks me to investigate. This also involves the sewers so I go into them. I encounter a few easily dispatched goblins and gibberlings. There is a large party of tough-looking fellows hiding out in the northeast (good thing I search invisibly with the cloak.) One casts True Sight and it breaks my shabby invisibility, but I am out of his visual range by the time I am visible. I will give them a miss for now. I am now 11th level, and the spells I am finding match this rather poorly. I have memorized three Minor Spell Turnings in the 5th level slots having not a single Cloudkill or anything else to put there.

There is a thief fence named Roger peddling his wares down there in the sewers, and he asks me to kill off a sea troll that has been pestering him, for a reward of 500 gold pieces. In melee this is hopeless; it regenerates as fast as I can damage it. Instead, I do what I am good at, casting Chromatic Orb (petrifies at 11th level) and then Flame Arrow to permanently kill it when it is down. The 500 gold are mine.

I find this wizard named Mekrath, and rather than fighting him accept his proposal that I comb the sewers for his missing imp, who stole a mirror of summoning. The imp is an easy kill with a Skull Trap, but what he is summoned is nigh-impossible: a Lesser Earth Elemental. I don't have a weapon that will hit it, still being constrained to the +1 quarterstaff that has long outlived its purpose, and Elementals are magic-resistant. Instead, as it is not necessary to kill it, I lead it into the end of the dead-end tunnel the troll lived in, then cast Invisibility just before it reaches me. I will have to remember never to go down there again, at least until I have the Staff.

Returning the mirror to the wizard satisfies him and he departs. The kidnapped actor appears, but he still requires a portal gem (from his appearance he looks to be a tiefling, a human/demon crossbreed; some humans distrust tieflings due to their heritage but I am sure many are not deserving of this, so I will do what I can.) I would imagine he wants to return to his home plane and is stuck here. You meet the most interesting people around here, I tell you. I have to battle through several Salamaders and Yuan-Ti mages guarding the altar the holds the gem, but emerge battered but victorious. Though I had previously bemoaned my situation of having three Minor Spell Turnings memorized as I have no other 5th level spells, I end up using them all. There are some nasty trapped chests here that Minor Spell Turning proves useful for avoiding the effects of.

Day 8
-----
Returning to the Five Flagons Inn, I rest and then deliver the portal gem safely. The actors there are happy to see their lost friend and gem returned. They open a portal gate, and several nasties emerge...then a bounty hunter who steals them away (and kills the remaining nasties, which I am glad of.) I follow them into the portal, and a very, very difficult battle ensues with the mercenaries there. I don't know whether I can do it; I am at a low point. Finally I see that the halfling member of the group is a very fast runner compared to the rest. I cast every defensive spell I can before going through the portal: Stoneskin, Protection From Evil, Blur and Improved Invisibility. When I arrive, I immediately cast every summoning spell I can, then Horror, and concentrate on the halfling while the rest of the mercenaries who aren't horrified pick on the summoned creatures. My protections are quickly gone but they have saved me. As soon as the halfling falls I look through his possessions...he has Boots Of Speed! I wear them immediately; this is a major tactical improvement for me as now I can run away from any of my enemies, and then run back to always have the first attack or cast defensive spells while far away from them. I unload every offensive spell in my inventory to kill the remaining mercenaries with ranged weapons, leaving only an elf with a two-handed sword, a Yuan-Ti mage and an Invisible Stalker it has summoned. The elf goes down with plain sling bullets; I have to wait for the mage's Protection From Normal Missiles to wear off while avoiding the Stalker. Eventually it does, and the Yuan-Ti is history. I have to kill the Stalker with my quarterstaff and take a little damage for my trouble; it doesn't seem to want to unsummon as it should.

There are "thralls" here with magical collars controlling them, but with my new Boots Of Speed I can draw them out one at a time and always keep my distance if they are using melee weapons. One of the best tactics for plain fighting is to always use the opposite type of weapon that your opponents do. Archers and crossbowmen are very vulnerable to melee attacks (even from wizards), and melee fighters are helpless against ranged opponents if they cannot get close to them. There is a secret storage area by the strange "brazier" with the first group of thralls...it has a pile of sling bullets in it. Just what I needed. Several thralls and a wyvern succumb to the incessant pattering of slung stones.

The Master Of Thralls is a tanar'ri, and yet again a new Most Difficult Battle record is set for me. He has two Air Elemental companions, and once more my ridiculous +1 quarterstaff shows how stale it is; it can't hit them. There seems to be no way through this; he paralyzes me with his gaze, and anything I summon can't hurt the elementals. He's also somewhat magic-resistant. However, many tries later, I beat him. I summon monsters until I get Dire Wolves, one of the few summons whose attacks are considered "magical". One gets a critical hit on him. I run away a bit until I can see the wolves but not him, and cast Skull Trap, a potent and often overlooked spell as it gets 1d6 more powerful with every level without hitting the 10d6 limit Fireball has. As I am now 11th level, the Master Of Thralls fails his magic resistance save and it does 11d6 damage on him. He sinks into the ground. I figure this is at least a start; I will probably have to lead the Air Elementals into an area I won't go into and cast Invisibility on myself to trap them there...until I inspect what the Tanar'ri dropped: The Staff Of Air +2! I can finally ditch that nearly useless +1 staff. This one will hit Air Elementals, and they have to save vs. spell or be slain with each hit. Hallelujah! They fall quickly.

After that, the Warden, a demon knight or cambion, is not so difficult. Because I retrieved the control stone from his Master Of Thralls, I free them by burning it in the "brazier", and they do most of the work of killing him. A Chromatic Orb and Flame Arrow is all it takes to do him in, though a thrall's Cone Of Cold does the final damage. I don't get the experience, but at this point I have completed the quest to free the actors, earned some nice items and some saleable items, and actually survived, which is enough.

Day 9
-----
For the first time, I welcome the sight of Athkatla. I sell off collected items that I cannot use, pick up a few spell scrolls lying around and so forth. I notice that for some reason, I now have 8 sixth-level spells in my book so far and only 1 fifth-level. Something is definitely wrong here, especially as I cannot cast any sixth-level spells yet. I now have just enough to pay the ridiculous 20,000 gold pieces that I require in order to find this girl I care nothing about. I guess I will have to in order to find out what is going on here, such as the plans of my former captor. I am approached by a young boy who says that the man who made the offer in the first place has "improved" the deal, shortly after I was approached by someone with a better offer. However, I would have had to meet her "mistress" in the cemetery at night. Uh, not interested. At least I know who I am dealing with now, so I will meet with him again. I had seen one of the members of this rival guild, and I think I know what they are. One was present in the dungeon that I found myself in, and two more were on the street. From their strange dancing movements, dark hair and light skin, the discharge of energy when they struck their opponents, slaughtering well-armed and armoured experienced thieves with their bare hands: they are vampires. They will probably make me one as well if I should take them up on their "offer."

I meet with Gaelan Bayle, and he has knocked 5,000 gold off his original offer. I now have 6,000 gold to spare after payment, and I certainly need it! I pay the 15,000 and he gives me a key...the contact is the Shadowmaster, the leader of the infamous Shadow Thief guild. I will pay him a visit. 

Of course, I get distracted for a short while...a mad cleric of Cyric (as neutral as I try to remain in the business of others, I cannot determine the attraction that faith holds) tells me I had best convert to Cyric's worship immediately. I ask him whether I'll have to remove my eyes first (a reasonable question given the other zealots I encountered) and he attacks me. Luckily his Hold Persons bounce off me while I pulverize him with my nice new staff. Stopping at a local inn called the Sea's Bounty for rest, I find there is a secret door. Behind it are several pirates (including a mage) who are not at all happy to be discovered. I cast Blur to avoid being hit, and then take out the knife-throwers and mage first with Horror, Dire Charm and Monster Summoning (I get ogres...very lucky as the opponents wear chainmail.) When only melee pirates and their summoned allies are left, it is an easy matter to keep away from them with the Boots Of Speed. Very happy to have acquired those. There is a secret treasure trove in a small pond here. Ahhh, money. I need it. Time for sleep.

First I decide to meet with Aran Linvail, the Shadowmaster. To compensate me for my large cash outlay, he gives me two magical items. The first is a +2 Ring Of Protection which can supersede the other one. Armour Class now -3. The second is far more potent: a unique item called the Amulet Of Power. It gives me slight magic resistance, permanent Vocalize (I cannot be silenced,) makes my spellcasting faster...and provides permanent Negative Material Plane protection. This confirms unquestionably to me that the "rival guild" I have heard so much about, and seen a couple of the members of, are vampires. Vampires are attuned to the Negative Material Plane; when they attack, a victim's actual level is drained away. Wizards forget spells, fighters become less potent by losing skills, and everyone loses stamina. A terrible attack, which can only be cured by a cleric's Restoration spell or an expensive Restoration scroll, or actually earning the levels back through gaining experience in battle and adventure.

A vampire attacks a Shadow Thief on the street, charms him and he turns on me. I go after the vampire instead, however...and discover just how difficult they are to kill. It hits me with almost every strike, and while that deadly level drain does not occur, I am quite damaged. As well, I can't even hit the vampire as fast as it regenerates with my pathetically low allowed attacks per round. I didn't even know they regenerated! Perhaps it only healed by absorbing my life-force when it struck me...I hope. I will find them quite difficult opponents in future no matter what toys I am given to play with. As I cannot kill the vampire with my staff nor cast magic in the streets, I lure it into the Copper Coronet tavern and cast Disintegrate on it. This does the trick nicely.

Day 10
------
There are human slaves kept as pit-fighting amusements in the Copper Coronet, it seems. While I am aware that good and evil will always exist regardless of my desire to further either, I find slavery repugnant and will do something if the opportunity arises. I end up killing the Beastmaster (I am now 12th Level, which means that Chromatic Orb has turned into the 7th level Necromantic spell Finger Of Death...he is down in two seconds) who holds the key to the slaves and his animal menagerie, freeing the slaves and killing the guards who supported the slaveowner; they are not difficult at all and I get a large reward of experience and the gems the owner carried. This is very good. Hendak, the most senior of the slaves, assumes ownership of the premises and advises me there is another slaver location nearby.

I have already been to this location and cannot gain entry; I can't force the outer door and if I cast Knock in the streets, a wizard will arrive to tell me I have broken the law. Hendak says that there is another entrance in the sewers.

The sewers beneath the Copper Coronet are different than the others. I encounter a band of hobgoblins (easy...one fireball kills all but two of them.) An area to the east holds an ugly creature called a Otyugh or something of that nature. Grey and alien with diamond-shaped "hands" flapping about on long arms and an ugly, devouring maw, it slows its enemies with every hit, and is immune to piercing damage. Surprisingly, it is very easy to kill. It is so squat and wide that it can't fit through a narrow passage to the south. I lead it to there and am able to hit it with my staff while it can't touch me. Actually, I remember that there was one in the dungeon I found myself in at first, and I killed it the same way through a doorway, but being a little out-of-touch at the time I failed to journalize this. There are also two Mustard Jellies to deal with; I despise these ugly slimes...spitting poison, magic immune and only damaged by magical weapons, their acid missiles slow their target. I cast Stoneskin to avoid this...but even though I take no damage when struck, I am still slowed, which makes me very angry having to stand around waiting for it to wear off as I am tremendously vulnerable when slowed.

A man is down here, Quallo...a clearly insane man, though it sounds from what he says as if he is dominated; another uses him as his voice. He tells me to visit another area and speak with the "controller", and thinks I am there for some "blade." In this area he mentioned are four pipes, and each one requires a ward in the correct order. I collect the wards (a hand from the sewers, a staff from some kobolds, a ring from a skeleton hanging on the wall, and the blood of his "friend"...a Carrion Crawler.) When I place the wards in the correct order into the pipes, I am rewarded with...a really nice +3 two-handed sword which of course I can't use. Great. At least I can sell it. I talk to Quallo again and he has indeed been dominated; he is freed. His haunting words as he shambles off are: "Gods! How long have I been here? What has happened to my family?"

I rest again...and dream. My first dream is meaningless. My former captor, the mage, taunts me with my Bhaal heritage and shows me the power I could have. He tortures the teenage girl a little...perhaps he is trying to make me care about her.

My second dream is far more direct and meaningful to me. A shimmering stone, blue and green like a tiny planet...can I see Faerun amidst its iridescent continents? It is a Rogue Stone. They are very expensive and rather rare. I need one. I see a house in the Bridge District, but its door is nothingness...the stone is the key, the stone is the key. There is dark and ominous magic there, more than one man could stand in a lifetime. The Staff is there. I must have it, I must! I awaken in a cold sweat and am unable to sleep for over an hour.

Day 11
------
I have it! I HAVE IT!!! Were it in my personality to dance and sing in the streets with joy, I would do so. Perhaps the Bards' guild would arrive and threaten me? I have done it. I relate the story of the capture of this nigh-unique item of extreme power: the Staff Of The Magi.

Upon awakening from my dream, I realized I needed a couple of items. I would need something to protect me from all forms of magic, and a Rogue Stone. I had about twenty-four thousand in gold at the time from quests I had completed; these items would be but a wise investment for my future. In the Adventure Mart, I purchased a scroll called Protection From Magic, which throws up a magic-proof shell that cannot be dispelled or removed in any way. It cost 2,800 gold pieces. I combed the city's shops for a Rogue Stone, and found one for sale at a place called Mae'Var's Guildhall in the docks, from a portly gent called Gorch. It cost 5,600 gold pieces. I cannot understand how weeks of work by a talented mage can be valued at half the price of a chip of rock, but I will have to live with this inconsistency.

I traveled to the Bridge district. I was waylaid on the way by slavers who were probably seeking revenge for my dispersement of their base, but I was able to avoid them simply by running away. I could not lure them into nearby buildings and have no desire to cast spells in the street and incur the wrath of the Cowled Ones. I arrived at the house I had seen in my dream, but could not enter it as there were Petrification traps on both doors, and didn't want to cast Protection From Petrification in the streets. I simply ducked into a Temple Of Helm across the street and cast it in there, then ran back. The first door opened easily...I imagined for this reason that it was not the right one. The second one put me into a difficult bind. It was locked and I could not force it. If I cast Knock in the streets, a Cowled Enforcer would show up. There was simply nothing else for me to do but cast Knock and allow the bastard to make his little "Magic is illegal" speech and then leave, my first and last warning. The Flesh To Stone trap bounced off of me and I was free to enter. When I did, the Rogue Stone disappeared (agh!) and I was dimension-doored to another place...

A place that looked for all purposes like a meeting-hall. A huge circular table in the centre of the room...marked with a symbol...a symbol...I know this group: they are the Twisted Rune! Oh, I have really put my foot in it this time. Messing with the Twisted Rune is instant death for demi-gods, and here I am a wimpy mage, on his own...I bit down and gained resolve. I will have that staff!

When I approached the table, there was a glimmering of light and a powerful lich by the name of Shangalar appeared. I told him it was an accident that I arrived here. I expected him to disbelieve that and he fulfilled those expectations. Of course, no organization so cowardly as to hide behind these elaborate mechanisms would fight fairly; he summoned his little Twisted Runies to assist him. So, all in all, it was Wimpy Human Mage vs. a powerful lich, a very high-level female human mage, a beholder (how did he fill in his membership card?), a vampire and a human thief.

No problem! As soon as I saw her, I knew she was the one with the Staff...now that I knew the employee roster, I was able to beat them. Here is what I did:

Equipping the Wand Of Cloudkill I had found (I had two, one with 6 charges and one with 1) and the Scroll, when first arriving I ran to the left of the table before Shangalar showed up and fired Cloudkill midway. As soon as the gas bubble left the wand, I read the Protection From Magic scroll. Shangalar made his speech, then gated his friends in. When they arrived, the mage and beholder were standing in the poison gas, and the scroll took effect right afterwards. Shangalar, the beholder and the mage were now basically powerless against me, and the mage and beholder started to be injured by the poison. I ran through it to lead them to further damage, staying well away from the vampire and thief. The mage, Shangalar and the beholder flung spells at me but they were useless. Many of the mage's spells failed as she was taking poison damage. She did manage to gate in a Pit Fiend...I immediately ran away from her, and she was forced to fight her own summon. The vampire fought it as well. The beholder, the thief and her were now badly injured from the poison gas. However, SOMETHING was getting through my Protection From Magic and killing me randomly. It could not have been running through the gas, as being 12th level I have 10 Hit Dice and therefore cannot fail a Cloudkill save vs. death and die instantly. One of the times I saw a strange spell with a blue display and a twirling blue rune. Could this have been it? Could be Symbol: Death...I will have to look into this.

As hellish as the quest to rescue the Boots Of Speed...er...Ha'er-Dalis was, they again saved me by allowing me to keep my distance when required and lead the enemies through the deadly gas. The Cloudkill ran out, so I hit them with another one (wands can be used with a Protection From Magic active...it just prevents cast spells from working.) The beholder dropped, leaving four enemies...and then the mage! Immediately I picked the Staff Of The Magi from her fresh corpse, identified it from lore alone and equipped it...and its powers became mine. To all remaining enemies, I was invisible. They stood around wondering where I had gone. Shangalar cast True Sight, but with the Cloak Of Non-Detection I was still invisible. If it had worked, I would have just re-equipped the Staff again and disappeared. The thief was Nearly Dead; I pounded him one step further. Now only the lich and vampire remained. I crushed Shangalar to dead bones, re-equipping the Staff with each strike, and suffered not a scratch. His corpse yielded over 2,800 gold pieces, and I gained 50,000 experience points from his centuries-belated demise. Only the vampire remained. The beholder's eye had fallen off when it died; this turned out to be the key out of the place. Knowing of the vampire's regenerative powers, not being able to cast Disintegrate through the magical shield, and satisfied that I had done everything I had set out to do and more, I departed, leaving Mr. Bloodsucker to wonder how a single, fragile human could have caused all this damage.

After wiping out a major organization of darkest intent singlehandedly and obtaining an item worthy of my close namesake, I think I need and deserve a rest...I have a LOT of quests I can finish now.

Of course, I have to go and investigate just what the second trapped door leads to...turns out there is a sarcophagus in the basement in an elaborate tomb, guarded by an Elemental Lich. However, I don't take a scratch killing him. One whack with Staff and he is mad, and he makes the fatal mistake of casting Gate. Reusing my technique of the battle that obtained the Staff, I simply run away, and it's Pit Fiend vs. Lich in the duel of the century. Pit Fiend is highly magic resistant and emerges victorious, then promptly unsummons himself. Inside the sarcophagus, I find a torso of golden bones...I seem to remember these. Something from deep arcania I heard in classes as a young acolyte...I should have been paying more attention to the lectures instead of the elven girl who practiced her minor divinations and enchantments in a gauzy robe. I am sure the meaning of these gleaming remains will become all too clear soon.

Day 12
------
I also solve the Skinner Murders, flaying murders of innocents in the Bridge district. A local courtesan has smelled something odd on a man who passed her. A friendly and helpful merchant gives me some samples of odouriferous items that are similar. She identifies the odour as oak bark tannin, useful in leatherwork. I question a beggar and he turns out to have found a strange sample of leather when the last murder occurred. The merchant identifies it as elephant hide. There is a leatherworkers' shop nearby. I question the proprietor, a Rejiek Hidesman, and he admits to the crimes, and escapes. I follow him into the basement tripping some Cloudkill floor traps, but he has fled the scene aboard a boat through a secret subterranean connection to the docks. A mage, two Rune Assassins (the Twisted Rune is popular in this area, I see) two ghasts and a hideous Bone Golem, a giant skeleton with bone scythe blades for arms, remain behind. The mage promptly disintegrates himself, perhaps to avoid being caught, and the assassins go invisible. I do too...but they can still see me. To avoid their backstabs I cast Stoneskin and their stabs are wasted. The other enemies can't see me when invisible...thankfully that Bone Golem is one of them. I concentrate on the assassins, whacking them hard through their useless leather armour when they are visible. My Stoneskins run out so I cast it again. The assassins' repeated invisibility runs out, so they don't. When they are dead, it is a simple matter to kill the golem and ghasts while invisible...this battle would have been difficult or impossible without the Staff as all golems are immune to magic. Now it becomes easy. There are some nasty traps in chests and boxes here, but nothing that waiting to regenerate won't fix. I gain some jewels, scrolls, experience, and reputation and gold for solving the murders. I find a very disturbing item under a bed: a tunic sewn together out of the flayed flesh of the murder victims. I feel sick looking at it, but keep it as it may be useful to track down the killer. A cryptic note indicates that he is hiding in Imnesvale in the Umar Hills and I can show him who I am by purchasing a certain book from him.

Making up for my slow start, I am off to the sewers. I rapidly dispose of the Lesser Earth Elemental (remember him?) that I had hidden at the end of a corridor. He had found his way out. The tough-looking party of six that I had bypassed earlier turn out to be brigands in hiding and demand 1,000 gold or my life; they fall to the Staff...and leave a tremendous wealth of magical weapons, armour and gems. I had 24,000 gold pieces even before returning to the sewers; now I have over 40,000. Roger The Fence buys it all as fast as I can harvest. A couple of Green Slimes, a host of kobolds and a Rakshasa...this weapon is truly wonderful and I am taking a fifth of the time or less to advance while taking little or no damage. With its 2 Armor Class improvement and a cloak called The Cloak Of The Sewers from the Rakshasa knocking another 1 off, my Armour Class is now -6 when wielding the Staff. Not bad for a wizard with no armour nor shield.

I investigate the Cult Of The Unseeing Eye. I encounter a Carrion Crawler, some Ettercaps and Shadows. All are easy. A tough encounter is with two Vampiric Mists in a chamber with a Cloudkill trap. Using Minor Spell Turning to reflect their Larloch's Minor Drain spells back at them is most helpful...they can see invisible creatures. Finally they are dead, and I meet with Gaal, the cult's leader, who asks me to retrieve a rod of power. He gives me a key. Just inside the sealed area is another elaborate tomb, just like the one the Elemental Lich was found in. There are some ex-cult-members here who want me to find the rod and destroy it rather than giving it to the cult leader. I think I will listen to them. The cult worships a Beholder, of all things, as a god. I just don't understand some people...

I descend into the bowels of the underground. There are a couple Sword Spiders and Giant Spiders...easy stuff. There is also a Wandering Horror and it is Not Easy At All. It can see me while invisible (being a mist,) it is completely magic immune (damn, I hate that) and its attacks can stun. I get stunned once and almost killed. I cast Blur to improve my saving throws and Armor Class and manage to get rid of it. I set off a Cloudkill trap grabbing a few spells and gems, which actually turns out to be handy. When I encounter a group of Gibberlings just beyond that, I lead them into the gas and they die instantly.

A group of Mummies and Ghasts are also easy kills, not being able to see me. Easy is short-lived...over a riddling bridge, three Beholders lie in wait: a full Beholder though not an Elder Orb, and two baby Gauths. They can't see me while invisible, but as soon as I whack one I go visible and their spells come fast and furious. Minor Spell Turning reflects one or two back before it's gone. Again I am glad I have 4 Minor Spell Turnings. I throw a Cloudkill at them and they take heavy damage while I run off and put up another Minor Spell Turning. When the cloud disperses, I throw a Fireball their way and now they are close to death. When I whack the Beholder, a Gauth's spells reflects back and toasts it. Two to go. The next strike takes out a gauth, and the Beholder's spells reflects back and kill it, canceling the Minor Spell Turning. Whew! There are some easily dispatched Shadows here too.

In a large underground cavern there is an ancient abandoned temple (with a nasty Petrification trap on its bridge.) The undead yet nonaggressive residents of this temple are haughty and hateful, resigned to their fate of eternally guarding it. Their hate has given the Empathic Manifestation (which looks like a tanar'ri) inside the temple existence. It invites me to attack with my hatred and feed it...well, this invitation is a little too obvious. Sorry, Manifestation, but you gave the game away. (I am a mage, you know. Hee hee.) Although I am not a priest, I do have a couple of Bhaalspawn abilities, one being Cure Light Wounds. I cast Cure Light Wounds on the Manifestation, the healing being the opposite of the hatred it feeds on, and it dies. When I do, the avatar of the missing god Amaunator appears. I can free his people by a positive act: taking the rod of power, using it once to destroy the Unseeing Eye, and then returning it. I agree to do so.

Returning to the ex-cult members, they are happy to see me and inform me that there is a "spy" of theirs inside the cult who knows how to enter the Beholder's lair for the second piece of the rod. I meet with the spy Tad there, go down a secret passage and into an area chock full of undead: Ghasts, Ghouls, Zombies, Mummies, Greater Mummies, Skeleton Warriors and even a Bone Golem. Luckily for me, not one of these undead can see me when invisible. I even use the sling for a while on the Ghasts and Ghouls as they are vulnerable to normal weapons, just to break up the monotony. Without the Staff, which strikes as a +5 weapon, I could not even hit the Greater Mummies as they require +3 or better. I achieve 14th level when the Bone Golem crumples. I also find a useful spell for this area: Hold Undead, as well as the usual crop of saleable items that are useless to me such as Gauntlets of Dexterity which would actually reduce mine by one point if worn. The Staff also casts three fireball/lighting spells a day. By clumping the undead into small areas, I can weaken them before having to resort to the very slow process of killing them with the ridiculous one attack per round the Staff gives me. Most undead are highly vulnerable to fire.

Through the undead "city" (with a zombie that proclaims itself the "mayor") lies a very difficult area: the lair of the Unseeing Eye. Itself a fearful Elder Orb, there are three other full Beholders and numerous baby Gauths here. My invisibility and excessive Minor Spell Turnings save me again. I am able to take out the lone Gauths with a Minor Spell Turning; when it wears off the Gauth is injured by its own spells, and I go invisible, then whack it once or twice. There is a clump of a Beholder and three Gauths. For them I use Cloudkill and go invisible while they take damage. Another Beholder arrives from the south and also takes damage. When the gas disperses, I cast another Minor Spell Turning, and it lasts just long enough to launch a Skull Trap. All three of the Gauths are killed, and one Beholder panics and flees. I pursue it and one strike from my Staff is enough to finish it. I am now out of Spell Turnings and spells...but not to worry. I still have the Spell Trap ability of the Staff, and one of the bonuses of Spell Trap is that one gains spells of equivalent level that are trapped, rememorizing them without resting. I cast Spell Trap and go up against the remaining Beholder. By the time Spell Trap is gone, I have rememorized three Minor Spell Turnings and a few other spells, including a Skull Trap. I take it down with Flame Arrow. The remaining Gauth needs no spells; I just go invisible and whack it, then return to invisibility quickly. The Beholder flees after two of its more potent spells are reflected; I take it down with my Staff, and the Eye Tyrants of Athkatla are no more. The Unseeing Eye itself fell to one flamestrike from the Rod Of Power, which left it so near death that any damage at all after that was fatal. The Rod is now useless to me.

There are a group of Blind Priests in the centre of the lair; they fall quickly and easily. Their spells are too slow in the casting to target me. I cast Monster Summoning to distract them. (Funny that their spells work at all, since their god is dead! Personally...and now Journal, you won't let other eyes fall upon this, will you? Personally I doubt that those thought of as gods really are...I think they are expressions of some essence within us, elevated mortals. Some are noble and loyal and honorable, some not, an amplification of our own natures. But even Djinn are immortal unless killed outright. I would like to think gods exist, but if a bizarre, mad mortal like Cyric...or my father...can become a god, it rather brings down the whole notion of godliness. I think that the magics of priests and mages spring from the same source but are opposite in character...like fraternal twins born of a single seed in a single egg in a single womb, but opposite in gender. But I digress...)

Day 13
------
The completed Rod and the lost god Amaunator are reunited, and the Rod is destroyed forever. The undead followers of Amaunator are finally free in death to join him. I am rewarded with...a nice shield I can't use. There are some useful spell scrolls in the altar of the now-abandoned temple.

Returning to the cult's lair, I finish it off. Gaal, the high priest, and several of his followers wielding crossbows, attack me. I cast Stoneskin and then send a Death Fog into their midst. Gaal panics and flees. I follow him and cut him down with sling bullets and the Staff. Only two of the followers have survived and they are near death. They take one hit apiece before falling. The rest of the cult disperses quietly, never to be heard from again, and I make no move to interfere with their peaceful departure. I can't open most of their chests; I will have to return later.

Returning to the ex-cult members, they are very happy with the outcome and depart...leaving me alone in the tomb, with the sarcophagus. Tomb...sarcophagus...very familiar. I can't resist. I have rested so my Staff's Spell Trap is available again. I open the sarcophagus. The lich that appears is a Shade Lich, as contrasted with the Elemental Lich before. It is no less fearsome, and its magic is darker, mostly necromantic. I cast Blur to give me a saving throw bonus and throw up a Spell Trap, then cast Monster Summoning after the lich arrives. The lich casts Time Stop, then three of the high-level Symbol spells at my monsters, wasting them (and the monsters, of course.) It then casts Finger Of Death at me...and I get a Monster Summoning back. I cast it immediately, still having one more. Another Finger Of Death, another Monster Summoning. Soon the lich is too busy dealing with the hobgoblins and gnolls, ignoring the fact that they can't damage it. It summons an Efreeti, I summon an Efreeti. It casts two Abi Dalzim's Horrid Wiltings, but because one is directed right at me, only the other one damages me, and I make my save. I will heal. The lich then does something I have never imagined a lich could do: it runs out of spells and is forced to use physical attacks. Its Efreeti is still alive while mine was toasted many rounds ago, and won't leave the lich, so I Stoneskin and smash the lich down. Now only the Efreeti remains...and can those buggers ever move. I can't get far enough from it to use the sling, and I don't want to risk getting killed when I have just defeated a powerful lich in a long battle, and have to do it all over again. I cross my fingers for a saving throw failure and cast my emergency reserve: Disintegrate. The Efreeti powders and falls to the cold stone floor. Inside the sarcophagus, I find another set of golden bones: arms and legs for the torso. I imagine the next find will be a golden pelvis...or more reasonably, a skull.

I emerge victorious and am rewarded at the Temple Of Helm with...a nice mace I can't use. I will sell it of course. My reputation increases, I gain experience, and I am paid outright 7,000 gold pieces, as well as given another quest (one of those zig-zag fetching quests I suppose...it appears the important task of the temple has been completed.) With this reward and selling off collected items, I now have over 70,000 in gold. Time to go shopping!

I would like slightly higher reputation for better prices at the stores before my shopping expedition, so I do another quest, this one for the Order Of The Radiant Heart. While I am no paladin, I respect these men (and women). Many of them are nobles, who have eschewed the cushy and pampered lifestyle they could afford, and unlike the bigoted, useless, arrogant fop noblemen I abhor, hold no prejudices, respect justice, and will gladly wade into the most dangerous and foul situations to lay down their lives for innocents of any social strata. Regardless of their demeanour (which some find haughty) I cannot help but respect their courage and motives, so agree to help them. One of their Order has left on poor circumstances, taken other members, and formed a group called the Fallen Paladins. They pretend to be paladins still, while practicing slave-trading and other crimes. I meet with one of their leaders, Reynald de Chatillon, in the Bridge district, on the pretext of helping him to slaughter some smugglers. He wants me to retrieve the real leaders' cup from the Order, as it is the symbol of his lost paladinhood and he cannot go near the Order. Returning to the Order, I obtain the cup on the premise that I will return it, which I agree to do. I am then able to meet the leader of the Fallen Paladins, Anarg. He is not fooled. He knows what I am there for, and the entire group of well-armed and armoured men turn on me. However, none of them have ranged weapons, and with the Boots Of Speed they all eventually fall to my tired sling, with a few choice Staff blows interspersed. I still can't cast spells in the streets without getting into trouble. Reynald de Chatillon is killed by one of his own for unwittingly betraying his group. I sell their plate mail, two-handed swords and Anarg's slightly magical halberd at a nearby merchant's stall, then return to the Order for my reward...Gloves Of Healing that I can't use, and a reputation increase. Doesn't anyone see that I am a mage??

First, I rest to memorize spells, one being the Charisma-increasing Friends. On awakening, my shopping spree begins. At the Adventure Mart, I ensure I am wearing the Ring Of Human Influence and then cast Friends. My Charisma hits 24. I speak to the sellers and note the items that stand out in high-contrast from the dreary rest that I can't use. The Robe Of Vecna strikes my fancy, and the +4 Staff Of Rynn, and a Lower Resistance scroll (finally.) I am done with the Adventure Mart for now. Rushing as fast as possible to the Copper Coronet before my spell wears off, I purchase the Sling Of Everard, a +5 that makes its own +2 bullets. Whew! After my wild spending spree and selling off my tired sling, magic bullets I don't need and the Gloves Of Healing, I still have 18,000 gold left. I'm off to the Government district to purchase a Magic License.

Day 14
------
This turns out to be a wise decision. I leave the government office, new license in...in...where is it? I don't get an official document for forking out 5,000 gold? I hope there's proof I paid! I didn't even get a receipt.

A vampire is outside. It charms a Shadow Thief, and they both attack me. Now I can take it on the only way I know how. Knowing how difficult they are to kill, I cast Disintegrate, but it makes the save. No wizards appear, so the license must be in effect and recognized. Two Amnish soldiers attack the Shadow Thief. I cast Agannazar's Scorcher on the bloodsucker for 10 damage. It is only Barely Injured. I can hit it with Sling Of Everard bullets (which do damage it, so I did purchase a good sling...I was somewhat afraid its bullets weren't magical.) It regenerates faster than I can damage it. I knuckle down, cast Stoneskin and use the Staff Of Rynn I just bought, which is actually deadlier than the Staff Of The Magi in straight combat. I manage to take it to Badly Injured before the skins are gone. I still continue to hit it after they are as well, wishing I didn't but determined to beat this thing into the dirt. Finally when I am badly hurt and the vampire is Near Death, I lure it to near the charmed Shadow Thief and cast Skull Trap, rapidly becoming one of my favourite spells. Both of them die. I am terrified by the notion that soon I may be fighting roomfuls of them due to my choice of allegiances, but I must press on.

I visit the cemetery to see what it has to offer...a load of undead I expect, and am not disappointed. There are Skeleton Warriors, Mummies, and Shadows, and a really tough Crypt King (no idea what he his, other than a dead man in armour with a magical sword.) The extensive hidden underground of the cemetery holds spiders galore, Ettercaps, Mummies, Skeleton Warriors, Shadows, Wraiths and a very out-of-place drow named Pa'ena in a spidery lair. None of these can see me with the Staff protecting me and the Sling Of Everard can damage all of them but the Crypt King, so they all fall almost easily. I get poisoned once by a spider (the little ones are really deadly) but the Bhaalspawn Slow Poison ability saves me. Pa'ena drops a couple of nice scrolls and a statuette, like Drizzt Do'Urden's, that summons a spider ally once a day. Nice to find an arachnid on my side for a change. In her lair, I find an Ioun Stone that lowers my THAC0 by 1 and gives me a 10% hit point bonus, which couldn't be more useful. I have heard some say that mages can't use Ioun Stones, but they are wrong about this...I have checked and we can. I put it on my head and it's a perfect fit. (You can even see it in my portrait, if you check carefully. Now why would I be painted wearing something I shouldn't?) There are other assorted jewels and things but nothing major.

There are a couple of doors in the underground I can't open. The handle exudes fear...the decor shows the trappings of a culture that worshipped death. Vampirism began there...the vampire's lair is beyond those doors.

I wonder when I will meet them.

Day 15
------
I must be tired...I accidentally fall asleep right in the middle of the cemetery beside a pathway. No one (or nothing) disturbs my rest and I wake up in the middle of the night, refreshed. I have long been able to sleep at any time when tired and not care whether it is day or night when I awaken. I leave the cemetery area, and am waylaid by a group of toughs who are busy murdering someone. They are easily dispatched by Staff and Sling. I use my Bhaalspawn Horror ability as well to distract a couple of them while I finish off the rest, then talk to their intended victim when they are all dead; he says he is poisoned and asks to be taken to his friends' compound in the docks. I do so and the guard in front of it thanks me and pays me a small amount of gold and experience.

Near this compound is an old...acquaintance. A conniving, deceiving, horrid man. His words speak nothing but fawning lies. I know this man...a fellow mage, and the kind that gives magic and magery a bad name. Xzar is his name. He wants a "favour" from me. He wants me to rescue his "friend" from the compound, a compound that he reveals to be the secret Harper base for the city of Athkatla. His "friend" is Montaron, a halfling thief who is almost his equal for lies and conniving. I consider and ponder. Any request from this man, who waits and waits outside, is trouble. This man is trouble...he is up to some twisted purpose being here. I was raised by a Harper: Gorion, a man who was more a father to me than any god who planted his seed and walked away...I talk to some guards, they don't mention him. I talk to the concierge of the compound, and I can't tell him Xzar's plans. How can I tell anyone what Xzar is planning, and stop his plans? No one else can. I cut him down in the street, mage vs. mage. His spells bounce off me, his summons are weak. When he dies I lose no reputation, I gain experience, and he carries numerous nice items...a +2 staff that turns into a spear, Bracers AC 6, some gems and scrolls. I feel no remorse at all, knowing I have stopped whatever plans he had.

Xzar...he was nothing. The three vampires I then face are something indeed. However, Tymora's luck is with me this eve as two badly fail their saves and go down to a Disintegrate and a Chromatic Orb immediately. The third falls to flame arrows, Agannazar's Scorcher and a Skull Trap. When I have the money, I will definitely, positively be buying a new, fully charged Wand Of Fire. Fire seems to work more consistently than anything else on them, and I will be facing more in future I suppose. I will buy a Sunfire scroll as well if I can't find one; this fireball spell is more potent than the standard Fireball and so is excellent for slaying massed undead.

Feeling lucky, I perform the requested task for Aran, seeing to Mook the thief, as she guards a shipment (of what?) Aran won't tell me but I am sure it is something that is harmless but would be viewed with great suspicion. Mook unfortunately talks to the vampire that appears, not knowing the fearsome powers of these creatures, and is killed instantly. I take out the vampire with Agannazar's Scorcher, Skull Trap, and Magic Missile. 

I end up selling off some items I hadn't identified yet, and buying new fully charged Wands Of Fire and Cloudkill from the thief merchant at the front of the Shadow Thief Guildhall by selling my nearly-drained Wands and buying them back again. They will prove most useful I am sure. They are expensive (even with Friends cast they are over 7,000 gold apiece) but my life is more valuable, and my required moneys (the 20,000 gold for the voyage) has already been raised and safely earmarked away by Aran Linvail. Even as the chief of a thieves' guild, I know he won't let me down. Something about him strikes me as being a man of his word, and I'd trust him over a pack of vampires any day. I have just over 7,000 gold left, but I am sure I will never find better in some of the items I have...a robe worn by the legendary lich Vecna, perhaps the most powerful spellcaster in history (far more so than any living being,) the super-potent Staff Of The Magi, a sling that makes the best possible bullets by itself and was forged by a god...I have been very fortunate. Now if only I could find some good spells!

Day 16
------
With new and potent weapons, wands and spells, I am ready to depart Athkatla to see what quests lie outside of its boundaries. I travel to the city gates, and rest in a little inn called the Crooked Crane that has only peasant accommodations. The innkeeper is a jovial fellow who makes me feel at home, and I sleep as soundly as if I were in the finest and most expensive room in the Mithrest. When I awaken, I discover that this inn has a secret: a hidden door on the first floor. I have to cast Knock to open it. Inside is secret room with a lich who, like the pirates in the other inn, is not happy to be discovered. However, he is a far easier opponent than the liches who guarded the golden bones. This one can't see me when invisible. I pop out of invisibility to summon monsters a couple of times so that he wastes his best spells on them, then take him down with the Staff. The Cloak Of Non-Detection prevents his True Sights from working. When he is finished, I Knock open a chest in the room and find...a nice magical longsword called Daystar that of course I can't use.

I leave the city and journey to Trademeet. I am waylaid by bandits; an easy battle requiring no spells. When I arrive in Trademeet, animals are attacking the militia there. I help them defeat the marauding beasties, then speak with the Lord High Merchant Logan Coprith, who refers me to Cernd, a druid currently interred in the prison not for any crime, but to avoid his lynching. The townsfolk have noted druidic involvement in the animal attacks. I speak with him and he tells me that he has been sent by the leaders of the druids to investigate why this grove is no longer part of the order, but has cut itself off. This would explain the attacks, and I smell Shadow Druid involvement. They have caused problems for me before. I believe Cernd as he seems a honest fellow, and agree to meet him at the grove to find the source of this problem.

Trademeet is also beset by Dao Djinn who have stopped all trade in the town as they are searching for a Rakshasa criminal that has long evaded them. Why they would hold human trade captive for this is beyond me, but they seem agreeable enough provided I find this criminal Rakshasa named Ihtafeer and return her head to them. Having no love for Rakshasa I agree, as it will no doubt benefit the town. In the north end of the town, I meet a Shadow Thief who tells me that Ihtafeer has stolen the form of a harmless potion seller in the grove, and disguised herself this way. She may also have allies. Now I have two reasons to go to the grove.

Day 17
------
I travel to the druid grove. There are many trolls here, but I can go toe-to-toe with them one at a time with little trouble. Once I have exhausted my fire spells (ie Agannazar's Scorcher, Flame Arrow and the Fireballs of the Staff) not wanting to waste the Fire Wand, I clump the remaining ones (no trolls can see me when invisible) and Cloudkill them, using a fireball or two to soften them up. A little-known way of killing downed trolls is poison, in addition to fire and acid damage. If a troll falls in a Cloudkill, it dies almost immediately. Poisoned weapons also work on them when they are down.

I manage to do in all of the more difficult trolls in the large mound at the western side of the grove with this method. I leave two of them, not wanting to exhaust the Wands, and already finding two treasure caches there. I will need the Wands for later; if I have to take on a great many vampires I will be lost without them. I reach 16th level taking on the trolls, and can now memorize an 8th level spell. I have only one so far: Protection From Energy which reduces magical damage by 75%. Good defensive spell.

This completed, I enter the former potion-seller's home. She knows why I am there, morphs into her true form and gates in two other Rakshasa. They are actually easy opponents as they can't see me when invisible. Only Ihtafeer can cast spells, and they fizzle when I pop into invisibility during her casting. As they are fearsome swordfighters with large scimitars and a very low Armor Class, I take them down from a distance with the Sling Of Everard after Ihtafeer's spells are gone. I find that to get from the southern part of the raised area on the west side of the building to the floor just south of there, one must walk all the way to the north wall, then east, then south again. I use this much to my advantage by luring them to the point where they have the longest possible walk to reach me, then running back to that furthest spot and targeting one. I can get two or three bullets off before they get close enough that I have to become invisible again. When Ihtafeer is down I retrieve her head; it is much like the head of a tiger. She also drops an amulet that confers immunity to poison and cures poisoning once per day.

There are several Shadow Druids here disguised as fighters, taking on some trolls. When I help them, they then turn on me. I let them finish off the trolls while invisible, then take them down...easy when they can't see me. This goes for the group of six Shadow Druids to the east as well, through I cast Death Fog to make the job a little easier. All but two perish to the fog.

I meet Cernd in a clearing in front of the druid's "grove" which is actually a cave, and I tell him we will enter and see who has taken over. It turns out that it is someone I am familiar with. Her name is Faldorn, and I had met her in the Cloakwood forest near Baldur's Gate when I was journeying to the mines to put an end to them (they had been reopened by the Iron Throne and populated with slaves, for the purpose of starting a war with Amn.) I had been suspicious of her motives then and refused her help, and now I was glad I did so. Faldorn has clearly slipped from being a druid and become something else...but the rules of druidic ascension must still apply. I invite Cernd to challenge Faldorn's rule of the grove, and she has no choice but to accept. Cernd is a type of druid known as a shapeshifter, who has purposely infected himself with lycanthropy, though with supreme self-discipline and technique is able to change at will and keep his personality and consciousness when in werewolf form. He uses this form against Faldorn in the challenge pit, and she is dead in seconds. The grove is free of her taint, and I can return to Trademeet.

Day 18
------
I am showered with items, gold and recognition when I return. From Lord High Merchant Logan Coprith's aide...a nice shield that of course I can't use, some gems (including a Rogue Stone) and 2,000 gold. From the Dao Djinn, who keep their word and depart when Ihtafeer's head is returned...a nice scimitar I can't use. They don't leave soon enough to stop my wonderful ferret Lhaeozarus from picking the pocket of the guard Djinn outside their tent, for a bottle that summons an Efreeti once per day. This may come in handy. The Lord High Merchant also holds a "ceremony" in which I am presented as the hero of the town (and it is nice of him to count Lhaeozarus as well, as he keeps referring to us in the plural sense. He must mean my familiar, right?) My reputation increases, he presents me with 10,750 gold pieces and I gain experience. I also have the inkling of two other quests: a woman approached me when I left the Djinn tent about her son's troubles, and the feuding premiere families of Trademeet seem to want my help. I check the fountain in the centre of town; my statue is there. I am a little embarrassed to be made such a fuss over; merely upholding the law as any of the militia would on a daily basis. 

First, I sell off all the items I can't use that I mentioned, and as well the Bracers Of Archery, some Plate Mail I picked up, and four full quarrels of magic ammunition from the Rakshasa's chest. I now have over 47,000 gold, but the merchant I sell to has two nice items I can't pass up...the Belt Of Inertial Barrier (+5 to Breath Weapon saves, 25% reduction in missile damage, and the clincher: 50% off all magic damage) and the Cloak Of Displacement (+4 bonus to Armour Class vs. missiles, and +2 to several saves.) Very handy...I can't resist and spend about 15,000 on them, even after casting Friends and wearing the Ring.

Curious as to what the families of Trademeet need my assistance for, I decide to visit the Alibakkar household. Lord Skarmaen Alibakkar seemed more passionate about the matter, where as Lady Lillith Lurraxol seemed sensuously manipulative and conniving. I speak with Lord Skarmaen. He indicates that a Mantle Of Waukeen is present in the town crypt, but that it is haunted. This Mantle would establish his family as the founders of Trademeet, and he gives me a key to retrieve it. I travel to the cemetery with a growing sense that something is wrong here. I am sure that I would have received exactly the same response, story, and key, from Lady Lillith. What will happen when one family has this Mantle? If it has no family name on it, surely they will kill each other for it...they have come to violence before. Just before entering the crypt, Lord Logan arrives and saves me completely from the dilemma. He indicates that if I bring the Mantle to him (and he certainly has nothing to gain from it) he will ensure neither family has it, and so end the feud. Although he cannot pay me as much, he asks that my conscience be the guide. As his word is the word of law and he has proven a most honourable man, I would not think of doing otherwise.

The crypt is haunted by a couple of Skeleton Warriors, one of whom is a minor cleric and casts many Animate Deads until the crypt is filled with skeletons. The click and crackle of walking bones follows me constantly as I take them down one at a time with Staff and Sling...invisibility makes me invulnerable. I can sell their +1 two-handed swords. The Skeleton Warrior cleric holds the Mantle of Waukeen; I return it to Lord Logan, and my reputation increases again. I don't want it to go TOO high.

When I visit the woman living just north of the Alibakkar estate who met me outside the Djinn tent, she refers me to her son. He tells me a sordid tale of Skin Dancers who remove their skin and have kidnapped his lover Raissa. He mentions a familiar and ominous name: I have finally tracked down the vicious murderer Rejiek Hidesman after he fled in his boat in the Athkatla docks from me. I meet a warrior named Darsidian Moor in the southwest of town, who mentions he is also hunting Hidesman. In the east I meet up with him again. Hidesman is down and nearly dead, and the missing girl Raissa is there. They beg me to kill Hidesman, but luckily I talk to "him" first, noticing that he doesn't look like he did in Athkatla, and I find out what it really going on. The downed "Hidesman" is actually Raissa, "Raissa" is actually Hidesman, and Darsidian is certainly not on my side. As a Skin Dancer, Hidesman is able to remove the outer flesh of other humans and disguise himself as them! Eagh! When I talk to Raissa, Hidesman knows the game is up and attacks, as a skeleton, with Darsidian Moor. As skeletons, they are very easy kills with the blunt Staff. When they die, Raissa is free to pick up her own skin and put it back on. However, she is not free, being cursed with the dark Skin Dancer magic, and requires a Restoration. Luckily I have several Restoration scrolls in my scroll case and she is restored to normal.

I meet with the lady again back at her house; Raissa and her son are to be married. My reputation increases again! I am sure I will find something to bring it down a bit. However, the choices being presented to me don't require heroic decisions...I am just choosing order over chaos, and everyone seems to be treating this as original.

I sample the wares of all the merchants in the area, and none have anything as good as what I already possess. One, in tent on the southeast side of town, does have a very important spell I have been searching for: Protection from Magical Weapons. I have no qualms about spending 1,600 gold for this scroll. My Trademeet quests are done.

Day 19
------
The next unexplored location on my map was the town of Imnesvale, in the Umar Hills. I arrive and the townspeople are gathered to hear Minister Lloyd, their mayor. There are bad things happening in the town, and no one is sure who to blame. Some think it is a pack of wolves gone bad, some think it is a group of ogres that moved in to the north, and others a long-dead witch come back to wreak her revenge.

Outside of the Imnesvale inn are four merchants. One is selling a lot of books...I haven't seen a merchant with this many. He has 40 copies for sale of a book called the History Of The Zhentarim...where have I heard this? I fumble, quickly, through my scroll case searching for the note I found in Hidesman's place. Yes! This is the man...the monster...who makes armour out of the flesh of murdered humans. Though he goes by the name Fael, I am able to find his true name and call him by it: Darcin Cole. He then asks whether I have the missing "component" for the armour: the blood of a Silver Dragon. His game, and life, are up. I confront him with his monstrosity, and he tells me I am "crossing the Rune" and tries to flee. Sorry, Darcin, but the Twisted Rune are no more and you are about to join them. He doesn't get far. I will sell his slightly magical leather armour, and with the death of Hidesman behind me I can finally consider the case of the Skinner Murders closed.

In the Imnesvale Inn, I talk to the owner Vincenzo, who gives me a book called "The Umar Witch Project Journal." He has about a hundred more copies in crates at the back, as his wise-cracking stableboy points out. In other chests in the Inn, I also find a Wand of Fear, 480 gold pieces and a Summon Efreeti scroll, which I will sell.

Just north of there, a farmer named Jeb indicates that something valuable is hidden in the chicken flock to the west. Speaking to the chickens' owners, Mr. and Mrs. Hendricks, I buy a Berjuril gem for 100 gold from them they had hidden in a chicken's gullet. These gems are even rarer than Rogue Stones, though less valuable for some reason. I will hold onto it; given the use the Rogue Stone had, this may be equally handy.

To the north of the town, I find Madulf the Ogre Mage and his band of deserters from the Sythsillian army. There is an ogre, gnoll, orc and minotaur. However, they all seem pleasant enough. Some of the townspeople are blaming them for the disappearances, but they have had disappearances from their own group. They seem just want to be left alone and trade occasionally for food with the village; an interesting arrangement. They will even protect the village since their ranger has vanished. I advise Minister Lloyd.

I find a cave inhabited by a strange creature called a "Mimic" that drops some of its blood when it dies; it looks like a treasure chest, probably to attract humans. I seem to remember that the blood of these creatures is used nee making golems. It's actually killed, not by me, but my two Umber Hulks that live there. I manage to take them down with the Staff; wouldn't dream of using anything else as when wielded I become more impervious to the Confusion magic they toss at enemies. I find some minor treasures with the Mimic and in a hidden area in the Hulk's lair in the cave, which I sell.

Marella the ranger's cabin holds some clues as to her disappearance; she was aware of the wolves causing the disappearances and left to find them, and never returned. Another note left by the halfling paladin Mazzy Fentan for one of her friends to find indicates she was on the same trail too. A ruined temple to the north of the Umar Hills is my destination.

Day 20
------
When I arrive, I find Shade Wolves, Shadows, and Shadow Fiends abound. Clearly, dark magics are at work here. A werewolf named Anath is here, and claims to have had her pack stolen by a "Shade Lord" who has taken over the temple. This temple was dedicated to the god Amaunator, the very same whose avatar I met in the bowels of Athkatla, and whose disciples I freed from their endless vigil. Having read Merella's journal, I believe Anath as Merella had indicated that the (were)wolves here were friendly and peaceful towards humanoids before these recent events. I agree to meet her at the temple, and have to fight through packs of shadow creatures to get there. None of them can see me when I am invisible. Knowing that many of them cause more than just physical damage when they strike, I use the Sling more often despite its slowness to keep away from them, and use the Staff just to become invisible and maintain a safe distance.

By the time I see Anath, I have killed most of the shadows and other shade-creatures in the area. She tells me to turn a mirror to light a huge crystal in the centre of the temple altar area and avenge her pack, then dies. (No shadows were around her at the time...perhaps she was frightened.) When I do, shadows and shade wolves pour from the darkness to attack me but are struck down by the light of Amaunator. I enter the temple. There are more shadows, shade wolves and some Skeleton Warriors here, but they are easily felled by the Sling. One of them holds a prison key, and with it I free the halfling paladin (and I don't see why she can't be referred to as such; she is a paladin in every sense of the word) Mazzy Fentan, a well-spoken and noble albeit very small being. The ranger Merella has been possessed by the Shade Lord, so is probably undead. Mazzy was being kept for the same purpose. I free her and continue.

I find a large bust that wants to ask me questions, pages of rituals (with which to answer them) and the defiled bones of the child prophetess Amauna (Amauna...Amaunator...makes sense.) Across a room with a lava lake in the centre, several undead (Greater Mummies, Skeleton Warriors and a Lich) lie in wait. I weaken them all simply by making them cross the lake to pursue me, while I scoot around the edges. The lake's fire is not magical, so it even damages the lich. The sling's bullets will even hit the Greater Mummies. Once they are dead, I can magically duel with the lich; the fool casts Finger Of Death while I have a Minor Spell Turning active and kills itself.

Across the lake of fire lies the tomb of the Child Prophetess Amauna and her spectral guardians. They are relieved forever of their duty by the return of her bones. She appears and gives me a wardstone that will cause the Shadow Dragon to not notice me...unless I want it to.

Day 21
------
I gain experience for this, and reach 17th level. I won't be advancing any further. I can memorize 5 1st-5th level spells, 3 6th and 7th level, and 2 8th level. I will never experience the joys of Greater Malison followed by Wail Of The Banshee, or Time Stop followed by three of anything. I will have to make do. Three of my saving throws currently are No Good (greater than 1.) I will have to find a way to improve them. Save vs. Death is 6 (ugh!) Save vs. Petrify/Polymorph is 3, and Save vs. Spells is 2..and I have to be holding the Staff even for those. I hope to find some more modifiers for them as I will nevermore improve them by advancing in level. With my Dwarven/Orcish Constitution and the Ioun Stone I have 96 hit points, which is excellent, even superlative, for a pure mage. There are several spells which creatures with 90 or more hit points are immune to (Power Word Stun, Death Spell, etc.) I am glad to be able to break that barrier. My THAC0 is 6 with both the Staff Of The Magi and the Sling of Everard because of my superhuman Orcish Strength and Elven Dexterity. This is better than many fighters, but still could really improve. And, of course, my Intelligence is superhuman as well, so I may not be able to memorize more spells, but I can pick and choose which to memorize from my book among anything less than 9th level, never hitting that horrid barrier that tells me I shall never learn more at a certain level. Why am I telling myself this? Perhaps to feel better...to know that I may not advance any more, but I should still be able to survive anything that might be thrown my way. Only time will prove me right.

I cross a stone bridge, and run into another clump of undead with a Lich in it. Drawing out the faster Skeleton Warriors and Greater Mummies, I lead them right back across the bridge to the fiery room, and their destruction. Now for the Lich. I have no Spell Turnings left. Knowing how poor my Save Vs. Death is compared to the others, and how many Necromantic spells are instantly fatal, I cast Spell Immunity: Necromancy. This turns out to be a very wise decision as the Lich throws two Abi Dalzim's Horrid Wiltings at me, followed by a Finger Of Death and Wail Of The Banshee. As they are all of the Necromancy school, I am totally unaffected. My next wise decision is to cast Summon Hakeashar (a greater Nishruu: immune to normal weapons, with more hit points and better attacks.) The Lich counters with Summon Efreeti, but the Efreeti's weapon is not magical so can't damage the Hakeashar, which ends up draining both of them completely dry of spells. The Efreeti and Hakeashar unsummon, and the Lich is forced to fight me with its bare-bone hands, versus my 19 Strength and +5 Staff.

There is a puzzle of a tiled floor here, but it is relatively simple. Just walking across the room stepping only on the tiles that spell "A-M-A-U-N-A-T-O-R" lets me pass. I am not sure what would happen if I hadn't figured this out. 

In a small chamber lies another piece of the puzzle of the Symbol of Amaunator that I have to put together. A suspiciously helpful Shadow gives me this information in return for me helping it across the puzzle (I guess it can't read.) Of course it turns on me when I take it across, so I turn on it one better. I just run back across the puzzle floor the correct way. It follows me the wrong way, and my question of what happens if the wrong tiles are stepped on is quickly answered as it is felled by a Flamestrike. Idiot.

There is a statue here in the other small chamber on this side of the puzzle floor, with its arms folded as if something was supposed to be placed there...it contains a few fire bullets and scrolls. One of them is Protection From Magical Weapons which of course I already just paid for. Great. At least I can sell this one. At least, I can after defeating the Bone Golem protecting it. It falls to sling bullets as I have a lot of hallways I can run around in to keep away from it. It is totally unaffected by the Flamestrikes and the lava lake. As I am running around, I realize that the bullets of fire are the only weapon I've found so far, or am likely to, that I can use that does fire damage...good way of saving the Wand from excessive use when taking out downed trolls: equip one fire bullet to do them in. I will have to conserve those.

I now have two of the three pieces, so the large bust of a man's head that wants to question me must hold the third. I reason together the answers from the pages I found, and do so correctly. The pieces merge into one sun symbol: the Symbol Of Amaunator, and I am free to open the last door and leave.

I know what lies beyond that door, and frankly I don't really want to let it live, but I am just a wimpy 17th level mage....can I do it? Wait a minute...I'm a 17th level mage. Of course I can do it! So I do it...but not before resting. Shadow Dragons aren't easy opponents, you know. Especially when you're all alone.

Before I rest I remove and add spells to ensure that I have the following: five Skull Traps, Protection From Energy, Protection From Magical Weapons, and Lower Resistance.

Day 22
------
The Shadow Dragon is huge, imposingly so, and takes no notice of me. The child prophetess has surely saved me by giving me this wardstone. There is no way I could defeat this without adequate preparation. It has a name: Thaxll'ssyllia.

As a Shadow Dragon, its breath causes severe Level Drain, like the attacks of Vampires or Wraiths, both Negative Material Plane attuned creatures. My immunity to this is my saving grace, should it decide to breathe on me. However it is still a fantastically fast and strong fighter, highly magic resistant, with very low saving throws...I will have to keep away from it to survive. All dragons are immune to invisibility...it just doesn't fool them at all, so I will not be able to have an easy time of this with the Staff. Pity the poor thief who tries to backstab one. Before doing anything offensive, I carefully scout the area while I can and note the apse areas to the sides, columned off from the open atrium of the chamber. They will prove necessary. To the west of the dragon, about halfway between it and the columns, I cast every single Skull Trap into a small area. Five little heads bob up and down, waiting for someone to come too close...I then cast Protection From Energy on myself in case its breath also has a damage component, ensure I am wearing the Belt Of Inertial Barrier and Cloak Of Displacement, and lastly...the one that causes Thaxll'ssyllia to go hostile: Lower Resistance. Dragons are usually 65% or more magic resistant; this knocks 27% off of it. Had I a cleric, I would cast Magic Resistance on it which would not make it attack, and it would also lower its resistance far more (set to 10%+1% per cleric level, which would set it to 27% were I a cleric.) However, I don't so this will have to do.

The dragon attacks, and I'm running as fast as the Boots Of Speed and screaming fear will take me, just far enough from the Skull Traps to not set them off, then dodging so they lie on a straight line between the dragon and myself...come on draggie...run over them...it does and they explode. On four of the five the dragon fails magic resistance save and it's Injured already...however, it chases me into the apse! I didn't think it could fit there, oops! I'm running for dear life again after getting 15 hit points nibbled off me immediately...but I turn midway, cast Protection From Magical Weapons and drop a Cloudkill. It follows and starts taking damage. Around the poison gas I sprint with Thaxll'ssyllia hot on my heels, back into the apse, then back out. Draggie isn't so fast to follow me this time, so I use one of my very few charges on the Wand Of Monster Summoning to raise some gnolls. I control them from charging forward into the gas to attack Thaxll'ssyllia, instead keeping them right on the border. It attacks them, but it's still in the gas and they aren't, so has to kill them one by one while taking poison damage with every round. Dragon now Badly Injured. Even with the fast attacks, it takes a while to do them in, and I'm certainly not standing around watching the show...I cast Summon Efreeti to give Thaxll'ssyllia something else to work on, and then unload damage spells: Magic missile, Chromatic Orb, finally Agannazar's Scorcher.

I hit the jackpot with that one...the Efreeti must have damaged Thaxll'ssyllia before it got powdered. Scorcher does 15 damage out of a maximum of 18, and Thaxll'ssyllia becomes a giant black spot, like a hole of nothingness. The dragon is dead.

I see there are some gems and things in the middle of its corpse, but I don't pick them up for a few minutes....I don't even move at all. I did it the first time...this is too good to be true. I am down only 30 hit points, and half of that was from running through my own Cloudkill. I still have two gnolls should I wish to discuss the matter.

Eventually they unsummon, and I am alone with the giant charred remains. I calm down and continue my journey.

The dragon yields several gems, almost 3,300 gold pieces, scales which can be made into armour that is as strong as Full Plate and allows thieving skills to be used while wearing it (but tough luck for me) and a scroll that details how a superweapon named Crom Faeyr can be forged from it and some other components. Unfortunately this superweapon is a war hammer, so I am yet again left out in the cold. Perhaps these items are saleable. I emerge into the welcome open air, and the Shade Lord confronts me. He is a pushover compared to the Shadow Dragon. He can't see me with the Staff, neither can his shadows, and they all go down after I kill his Altar's persona and then him. He casts Negative Material Plane spells which would Level Drain me, but I am immune. He casts Blindness but it goes away a short time later. The Sling Of Everard's bullets work just fine on him, and I score two Critical Hits. Glad I sprung for that item...

When the Shade Lord falls, it is revealed that he was indeed possessing the body of the lost ranger, Merella, who dies. She yields the Shade Lord's treasures: a cloak that will create six +5 darts daily, a Rogue Stone, a King's Tears gem, and 4,700 gold pieces. I am awash in money! I wonder if I will find a use for it all, given that I already have items that are second-to-none, and there isn't a lot a mage can use. I head back to Imnesvale with the good news. Minister Lloyd is overjoyed, so much so that he forgets that I am a mage and gives me...some nice highly enchanted leather armor that I can't use, plus 25,000 experience that will not go towards advancing me, and a higher reputation I don't want. Great. I talk with Madulf and his group; they have fit in well into Imnesvale and are so happy that they give me...a nice shield that of course I can't use. It adds 5% to one's magic resistance, which I really would like; damn.

I have about 42,000 gold pieces before I sell all the items I collected off. I have over 57,000 afterwards. I return to Athkatla.

Day 23
------
Stopping in at the Adventure Mart, I cast Friends. From Ribald Barterman, I buy both scrolls of Protection From Undead, his last Protection From Magic, and sell then buy back my Wand Of Monster Summoning so that it is fully charged. From Lady Yuth, another Protection From Undead, and the spells Limited Wish, Sunfire, and Wizard Eye. From Galoomp The Bookkeeper in the Promenade's north end, the spell Greater Malison and another Protection From Undead scroll. That's enough shopping for one day. I still have 43,000 gold pieces left, and I am not feeling any more experienced when I read the spell scrolls. I check and find I have 2,950,000 experience points. It will never increase. I have reached my limits of personal advancement. Now to fix those awful saving throws with something magical...

Before this, I notice that my inventory is getting a little packed. I have all these documents in my Scroll Case that I don't think I will ever need again, and keys and items from done quests. I don't just want to throw them away...they are like mementos of great triumphs and interesting places I have been. I find a lion's head motif design in the wall of the west Promenade that is hollow, and objects can be stored in. I return here often...it would be an ideal place to keep them. I fill it with keys, papers, quest items and things I have no idea what to do with.

There are a couple of "loose ends" I can tie up. I find I still have the toy bear of a little halfling boy who was murdered by a thief. His spirit, wandering the cemetery, was not at rest, and he had asked me to obtain the Littleman bear from the thief in the Copper Coronet. I did more than that; the thief will never murder another innocent child again. I return his bear to him...he sleeps peacefully in death now.

There is also the zig-zag quest for the temple...but I will put this off for now. Temples don't usually pay well (I already did the well-paying quest for them,) I already have too high of a reputation and experience is useless to me. Instead I head down to the Bridge District...there is a trapped chest in a house with a fish merchant in front of it. The chest will cast Maze when opened. Now that I have the spells to deal with this as I can't disarm it, I cast Spell Immunity: Conjuration and open it without effect. There is a Silver Horn of Valhalla inside. It will summon a berserk 5th level warrior from Valhalla to assist me once a day; very handy, and I won't feel bad throwing him at dangerous situations as he's already dead, and probably wants to get back to Valhalla as soon as possible! Remembering the fellow named Maheer in the Promenade who said his specialty was musical horns (and that even the dwarven arch-smith Cromwell couldn't make them) I return to him. He upgrades the horn to a Bronze Horn Of Valhalla (summons a 7th level berserk warrior) for 2,000 gold and a diamond...and says that if I ever find a Berjuril gem to return. I have been carrying around the Berjuril I got from the chicken for just such an occasion, and upgrade the horn a second and last time to become an Iron Horn Of Valhalla (summons a 9th level berserk warrior) for 5,000 gold. I will make good use of this horn, especially in my battles against spellcasters. Berserk warriors are immune to: Stun, Horror and fear-related morale failure, Confusion, Charm, Feeblemind, Sleep, Hold Person, Domination...and even Maze and Imprisonment! Amazing that a state of mind can do all that. If only wizards could berserk...sigh. Well, we have our way of becoming immune to all of that as well through the spell Mind Blank, but I haven't been able to find one of those.

My major "loose end" is those golden bones I have found. Considering I had to fight two potent liches just for those and am not even done yet, they must result in something powerful indeed. I know where the last part of this quest can be resolved: the one sarcophagus I didn't open yet...I travel to the Docks. When I arrive, an idiot called Habib with about four names after that confronts me and says he will throw his mighty scimitar at my head. I go invisible and whack him a Critical Hit which kills him. I would have gained no experience from him and all he has is that non-magical scimitar. Weird. I place it in my bag and continue. I had best rest first as I know I have a hell of a battle coming up, and I want to memorize a few new spells as they may matter.

Day 24
------
The innocuous-looking house seems normal enough, but it radiates evil, and you know what evil means...yes, yummy magic items! (Not the response most would imagine, but I have as much fear of zealotry in good as evil, and good's magic items are usually less yummy.) There were three Minotaurs guarding the top floor, but they were easy opponents, not having ranged weapons, not magic resistant, and slow movers. They were eliminated long ago. I descend to the basement sarcophagus, nervous but confident of my abilities (and items.) I know what will happen when I open the sarcophagus: a lich will emerge. He will probably be holding something very valuable, something that I might even be able to use to protect myself against him.

Indeed! Setting little Lhaeozarus down, when Kangaxx The Lich arises he is slightly disoriented for a half second or so, just long enough for my little rodent friend to lighten him of a ring, which I immediately lighten her of. Of course, I then return her to the safety of my pack as she is bound to be killed instantly when Kangaxx attacks. I don't even bother to identify the ring but wear it immediately. Nothing requiring this much effort could be harmful. Instantly my Armor Class falls two points, I am more magic resistant, my saving throws are better, and even though I removed the Ring Of Regeneration to wear this one, I am still regenerative, and it's faster! Also, I have become completely immune to poison and disease. Truly, this is an item of extreme power. Little do I know that it has a twin...and I will have it soon as a well-matched pair.

Kangaxx throws up Spell Trap, Protection From Magical Weapons and Stoneskin. I don't even bother attacking, just throw up a Spell Trap of my own and get away from him. He throws a Sunfire my way, but I will heal. He then summons a Efreeti, which I toast instantly with Death Fog (which kills summons instantly regardless of hit dice or immunities.) Who knows what else he will throw at me, so since the Death Fog isn't near Kangaxx I throw a Hakeashar at him. Again it works its usual wonders...the worse the Lich throws at it, the more it heals. It can't touch the Lich at all to drain its spells, but it drains them well enough by being a target. I use the Wand of Monster Summoning to give Kangaxx even less chance to target me; he wastes a few spells on hobgoblins. Drained, he has to attack me physically, but I keep this one at a distance. The Sling Of Everard takes it out just fine.

When this Lich dies, it changes...into something worse: a Demi-Lich, a floating skull that casts Imprisonment indefinitely, interspersed with the occasional Demi-Lich Wail Of The Banshee. Imprisonment is nasty stuff: it's a 9th level spell that requires another 9th level spell (Freedom) to undo. And, as I am alone, there is nobody to undo it should I be affected. The demi-lich is also completely immune to all my magic and needs +4 or better weapons to hit it. Luckily I have nothing else, and even the Sling Of Everard can damage it. Rather than casting Spell Immunity: Abjuration to avoid the endless Imprisonments I instead read one of the Protection From Undead scrolls (after removing anything I wear that confers magic resistance...it fails to work if they are in place.) This turns out to be a good decision: the duration is far longer than Spell Immunity and Kangaxx the Demi-Lich completely ignores me as if I did not exist, even when I damage it!

However, the problems are not solved, and seem insurmountable. I only get one attack per round and this bugger is about 80% damage resistant, has a very low Armor Class and regenerates. I can hit him for 1-3 points of damage, but if I miss a few times (and I do even with my 19 Strength and the Staff Of Rynn adding 7 to all my attack rolls,) he gets all the damage back. To double my attacks per round to 2, I drink an Oil Of Speed and remove the Boots of Speed so they don't ruin my attacks per round. To become even stronger, as I can't use Giant Strength Potions, I use my Bhaalspawn ability Draw Upon Holy Might. This works! My damage roll modifiers with the Staff Of Rynn (which is better for straight fighting than the Staff Of The Magi) go to +10; Kangaxx goes from Barely Injured to Injured to Badly Injured, then...then...then he has a Morale Failure and runs away. He runs very fast for a floating head, and even though I can catch him I can't damage him. He recovers. Even hasted, I can't damage him with the Sling Of Everard as fast as he recovers. Dammit!

I rid Faerun of him by combining all these techniques: Protection From Undead scroll, Oil Of Speed, Staff Of Rynn, Draw Upon Holy Might, and trapping Kangaxx in the narrow walkway that leads up to the sarcophagus with monsters from The Wand Of Monster Summoning when he is trying to run away. I don't summon anything until his morale fails as they won't be protected by the Protection From Undead and he will just imprison them. Finally, after hours of whacking he is dead...or deadER. Were I able to receive them, I would have earned 55,000 experience points from his demise. He drops some gold, a pearl necklace, and another ring that exactly matches the one my friendly ferret picked. Now I know why he regenerated. I can wear both rings simultaneously. If it is the same, then the hours of effort were well worth it...

And they are the same, as I find when I take them to a little fellow named Ikert who sells from a nearby stall to have Identify cast on them, and gladly pay the 200 gold. They are called Rings Of Gaxx, and their stats. are like this: 2 bonus to Armour Class and Saving Throws, Immune to Disease and Poison, regenerate 1 HP every 3 seconds, +10% magic resistance, cast 3 x Improved Haste and 1 x Invisibility daily (and only the last ability is not useful to me.) With both on, I find they ARE cumulative, and my Armour Class has sunk to -8 (with the Cloak Of The Sewers), I regenerate 2 HP/3 seconds, and am 20% more magic resistant (35% in total with the Robe Of Vecna and Amulet of Power.) With the Cloak of Displacement, my Save. Vs. Death is 2 and all others are 1 or less (some are negative.) So without Greater Malison or a spell with a built-in penalty, I can only ever fail a save by rolling a 1 on a Save Vs. Death.

This is good.

Returning to the cemetery, I enter the southern area's dungeons that I avoided before and clean house. Again, all the undead are blind to me, but I can now go toe-to-toe with Mummies as their diseases won't affect me. My best kill comes from finding a group of four Mummies and three Ghasts together while invisible...I cast Skull Trap and they all die, every one of them, instantly. I find a few small items and gems, but nothing really interesting or worthwhile. I even kill a Vampyre with the Staff, finishing it with a fire column from the Wand. The ornate tomb that this leads up to has already been stripped, the fingers of the corpse broken to retrieve what it was holding.

I guess I will try to complete the zig-zag for the Temple, so next stop is the ore merchant Jerlia in the Promenade, who refers me to a Duergar named Unger Hilldark in the Copper Coronet. Of course, I don't make a fuss about him being a Duergar, but he doesn't have any Illithium either. (I wonder, are Illithids made of Illithium?) It was stolen by a Neb, who he says "left a lot of families crying" and is on the run from Baldur's Gate. I know why...I was briefly imprisoned with Neb when Sarevok had me arrested, after he placed his flunkey Angelo in control of the Flaming Fist. Neb is a child murderer, and in order to escape I had to answer his riddle of how many children he had murdered: 33. I will not let him live if I see him.

I don't have to worry about him fleeing. When I enter his house in the Bridge District he attacks me openly, drinking potions to haste and go invisible, and trying to backstab me. I simply cast Stoneskin and his backstabs do nothing. He also...summons the ghosts of the children he has murdered to attack me. He has Wraithed them and they would level-drain me if I were not immune. Ugh...I find this more disturbing than any of the horrors I have seen so far. I ignore them and concentrate on Neb alone. He only has about three invisibility potions and when they are gone, he is an easy target. When I whack him with the Staff his Haste is gone, and he can then be dealt with easily. He dies, and the spirits of the children are freed, thanking me for the peace I have brought them. The last one to leave casts Lesser Restoration on me which would have undone any level drain. For once I wish a divine order to things, so that the children may sleep in peaceful innocence, and Neb may burn forever in the Abyss. Neb drops the 200 stones of illithium ore I sought him for. His head has come off as well. I pick that up as he doubtless is wanted for his crimes and this is proof of his death. A trapped painting holds a few gems and as well there are some potions on a shelf.

I know that Illithium has uses in making weapons to fight the undead, but I am certain that I wouldn't be able to use them. So, I keep my word and give the 200 stones of Illithium to Sir Sarles, who is pleased. I then advise the Temple Of Helm I have done so, and they give me...a nice helmet I can't use. They send me for one more mission to the Temple of Lathander. One of their relic Dawn Rings has been stolen by Talassians and they want me to retrieve it. This is getting a little too far into the politics of the religious for my liking, but I have given my word. I hope they have no other tasks for me. I check what the temple has for sale, and there are two more scrolls of Protection From Undead, so I buy those, and into the scroll case they go. I now have five of them. That should be enough for whatever I encounter.

Day 25
------
I encounter Travin, the Dawn Ring thief, in the north end of the Slums, and he indicates it's with Borinall, a thief who lives overtop of the Copper Coronet (so much goes on there!) I enter his residence. He is about to give me the ring, but wants me to swear allegiance to Talos to prove who I am. I'm not about to swear allegiance to any god, so I have to fight him. He is very easy to take out; although he calls in a few cronies, I just cast a Skull Trap when they are close and all of them die. Borinall carries the Dawn Ring, and there are other minor goodies here. Hardly anything in the two chests (I force one and Knock the other.) I return the ring to the Temple of Lathander for 1,000 gold and experience that does me no good. Helm has no further tasks for me. Checking with the priest of Helm what's for sale, I buy another two scrolls of Protection From Undead, so I am up to seven, and some Potions Of Insight which give me maximal Wisdom. I will need them for the Limited Wish spell; this spell tends to fail if the wisher's Wisdom is low.

I have two areas to still visit, but I won't be getting any more experienced for visiting them. They sound like the kinds of quests that fighters would do; I will probably gain a heap of weapons that I can't use and little else, or items I can use that aren't as good as I have already. There are still some spells I need (Maze would be nice, and who knows what else...could use Mordenkainen's Sword too) so I had best do them as I may not be able to buy them.

First I meet with the Shadow Thief leader Aran Linvail, and he does want me to go forth into the vampire lair and do battle. I am glad I prepared, and even more prepared after replacing a few spells and resting. I awaken and the streets are silent; it is early morning. I am a little afraid, so for fun I drink a Potion Of Insight and try my new Limited Wish. I wish "to see all as it really is" and get Glasses Of Identification. They will perform Identify three times per day. Great! No more worrying about Identify scrolls and I can free up that spell slot for something useful. I memorized two Sunfires, three Chromatic Orbs, a Hold Undead, and I have all those Protection from Undead Scrolls and the Fire Wand. I should be OK....should.

I enter the underground of the cemetery. Mage Haz is there with his golem. They open that set of double doors I could not get through earlier. A vampire named Lassal "greets" us, then several Grimwarders (specters with flails and helmets) lay into us. Haz dies immediately. His golem helps me kill them, and disappears after a minute or so. I can go toe-to-toe with them; they injure me but I heal as fast as they can hurt me with both the Gaxx rings. They are immune to missile damage, but they can't see me when invisible. Neither can any of the vampires. I scout the lair, find where all of them are, and clump them into the central room by popping out of invisibility and luring them there, killing a Clay Golem in a chamber with three ornate coffins safely and invisibly in the interim with the Staff Of The Magi. The vampires don't stay put long, constantly running around, but when I go visible they seek my current spot and I can go invisible, back off, and strike. 

First, to deal with the vampire mage Tanova near a room full of nasty-looking spikes. I put on the Cloak of Non-Detection to stop her True Sights, then Summon Hakeashar. Fortunately she is not smart enough to realize she could kill the Hakeashar in seconds with her bare hands. While she wastes every spell she has on it, I deal with the massed vampires in the dining room. I first cast Greater Malison to lower all their saving throws, and note the strong and weak ones. Chromatic Orb takes out two of the weak ones as the strong (named non-fledgling) ones probably have very low saving throws. I cast Sunfire and two go to Nearly Dead; they fall to Agananzar's and a fire column from the Wand. Two are Badly Injured and one Injured now, they both die from a Skull Trap. One is now left, Badly Injured. Fire column and Magic Missile is all it takes. I return to Tanova; she is Injured as a result of her own fireball spells, and has killed her own Simulacrum. While she wastes more spells on the Hakeashar, then attacks it with her bare hands, I pound her down with the Staff.

I return to their coffins and am able to stake two of the three of them. Another vampire, probably the strongest, must remain. I also take a small hit of damage but find a mace designed for undead slaying in a pool of human blood. Of course, I can't use it. Perhaps this is a weapon I could have used the Illithium with to make it more powerful.

I descend further, into a room filled with blood pools, encountering a couple of easily disposed Ghouls on the way; one is a fast Greater, but after a dispelling tap with the Staff, he slows down to normal ghoulish speed. Just before entering, I read one of the Protection From Undead scrolls. This is a good idea, as there are three vampires in the room in addition to two Grimwarders and two Grimward Archers. The vampires now completely ignore me. Lassal waits in a small antechamber but ignores me as well. I put on the Cloak Of Displacement to avoid the arrows, and whack the archers with the Staff. Every attack connects with the large bonus I get using a melee weapon against ranged opponents. When they are gone, I deal with the Grimwarders, casting Stoneskin and toe-to-toe fighting, then backing off into invisibility when the skins are gone. After that, the vampires are easy. I just follow them with the Staff Of Rynn, using the Ring Of Gaxx's Improved Haste from time to time to speed up the bashing so they don't regenerate. I don't take a bit of damage. Lassal will not fall, however, no matter how much I whack him. Ahh...he has something to say. I let the scroll wear off, and he talks: he wants me to meet him upstairs in the nasty spike room. He disappears. When I go upstairs, he is not in the spike room, but at the top of the stairs. I use the Staff's special Lightning/Fireball ability, and he is no more. I can probably stake his coffin now.

When I do...someone appears...the Queen Of The Damned, the Negative Material Girl...Bodhi, clearly the true leader here, the "mistress" the woman who offered me better than the Shadow Thieves referred to. Bodhi is strangely elven in appearance and even more strangely...attractive, with a melodic voice that manages to be sultry and girlish at the same time. Too bad she's a bloodsucker. I try to be agreeable and find out just what this is all about, but she insists on fighting me. She does reveal two important things though: she knows I am a Child Of Bhaal, which confirms Irenicus' interest in me, and she is his sister. She uses the word in quotations though; clearly she is his sister, but she is undead and he is not. Despite her powers, with the Staff's invisibility, she is as blind to me as the rest were, and I can casually pull back to ponder what to do. She is highly magic resistant, so I Stoneskin, Improved Haste, Draw Upon Holy Might and wield the Staff Of Rynn. Half a minute later she is overwhelmed and fleeing to whatever coffin she will recover in. I have won for now, and the vampires' lair is no more...I hope. I have definitely earned a good rest. I change a few spells before resting.

Day 26
------
I awaken, and begin my journey to the Windspear Hills, not really sure of what I will find there. Lord Jierdan Firkraag had said I would earn 10,000 gold pieces for simply killing a few trolls, ogres and other simple monsters. I am certain time will tell, and equally so it will be nothing like that.

Day 27
------
Arriving, I am beset by a group of "monsters"...an Ogre Mage who casts no spells? A Baby Wyvern that drops Plate Mail when it dies? And an Ogre who clearly uses a mace as Ogres usually do but drops a two-handed sword, and Plate Mail? Something is wrong here. All the "monsters" are easily slain with Staff and Sling alone, but when they are all dead, they polymorph into dead humans. The former Lord who named this land, Garren Windspear, appears. I have been cruelly tricked. I accompany him to his residence. Lord Jierden Firkraag, it appears, lured a group of paladins to these lands at the same time as myself. As Firkraag is a master of illusion, I must have appeared a monster to them, while they did to me. Windspear's land were stolen and he has been endlessly taunted by this Firkraag. He will go to the Order Of The Radiant Heart and explain the situation. I rest at his residence while he goes, leaving his daughter to watch over me and his home. While he is gone, she is kidnapped by other associates of Firkraag to make it appear I have done so, and they then fight me. I slaughter them all easily with Staff and Sling, not even requiring spells, and Windspear returns. He has explained the situation to the Order, and knows Firkraag to be responsible for his daughter's abduction. I will find her, and finish this Firkraag's "fun" if I can.

I explore the Windspear Hills...there are a few easy encounters with Orcs and Orc Archers, some fighters who are actually Werewolves who attack me after honing their skills on some Gnolls, and an Ankheg (giant acid-spitting insectoid.) In the northeast, I meet the Fairy Queen...I have been carrying the acorns of her Dryads since I was stuck in Irenicus' dungeon. She replants their trees to free them from that awful place, and they depart. In the north end of Windspear, an entrance to an underground area awaits. Its columnar gateposts bear dragon insignia...I have a hunch as to what, rather than who, Firkraag might be...

I enter. Guarding the front hallway are some Hobgoblins (including a shaman and mage.) Easy stuff with the Staff. When the archers, mage and shaman are dead I use the Sling. There are more Hobgoblins north of them, and some Orcs and Orc Archers. All equally easy. A small underground lake conceals some minor treasures and a Vampiric Mist that invisibility doesn't fool. I cast Minor Spell Turning to reflect its Larloch's Minor Drains back to itself and use the Sling; its THAC0 is low so I want to stay away. Guarding the northern door is a Rukh Transmuter, a type of Rakshasa. It has several pet Kamikaze Kobolds, so I don't let them get close to me. They can see me when I am invisible. The first sling bullet causes one to explode in a fireball, which kills all the rest of them in a chain reaction. The Rukh is easy, not having any ranged weapons nor spells.

Through the north door, I am stuck in a central room with apses containing numerous Orc Archers trying to make a human pincushion of me. I put on the Cloak Of Displacement and Girdle Of Piercing; my Armour Class is now improved by 7 against them and only critical hits get through, which I heal quickly from. I exhaust their ammunition and they do a funny dance, trying to walk forward to engage me in melee. Numerous Sling bullets do them in. I am glad these Orcs are not remotely as powerful or cunningly skillful as the fearsome Half-Orc fighter/thief Karzak I have heard many tavern tales of. Like myself, he travels alone and has done in Dragons, Beholders, Liches and other strong enemies singlehandedly. However, he is rumoured to be Friendly.

Further north lies one of those challenges that should be impossible for me, but turns out to be easy: three Stone Golems and an Adamantite Golem, the most powerful Golem there is. The Stone Golems can follow me through the doorway, but none of them can see me with the Staff making me invisible. I quickly dispatch them, and the Adamantite Golem falls eventually to a rain of Sling bullets through the door. Each one does at most 3 points of damage to it, but it has a surprisingly low Armour Class. (What's the definition of boring? Watching a mage with one attack per round killing a 80% damage-resistant Adamantite Golem with sling bullets.) I am untouched throughout all the Golems' destruction.

A room to the east holds two non-aggressive Orcs who I let go; they tell me Firkraag expects me to die. A room to the west holds a Troll Cook and some Hobgoblins. The cook wants me on the stove...uh huh. When he's down, I don't even waste a Sunstone bullet on him, using Agannazar's Scorcher instead. Under a broken chaise lounge chair, I find a strange Orcish Cookbook that the troll used...it details some of the enemies I will face. South of there is a room empty save for one of those ugly Otyugh creatures I described before...and it can't fit through the door either. I can switch to the more destructive Staff Of Rynn and happily mash it while impervious to damage. Another chamber holds shade creatures: Shadows, Wraiths, a Greater Wraith...all blind to my invisibility and damaged by Sling bullets. I retrieve a Chapel Key from the chamber.

Day 28
------
I meet someone named Samia here, and she wants me to find a tome detailing King Strohm III's life. In my explorations of the dungeons I have to defeat seven guardian Djinn. All their attacks are fiery (as they are elementals from the Plane Of Fire,) so I read a scroll of Protection From Fire beforehand, and they are all easy. I make a lot of magic resistance saves and their fireballs damage themselves more than I (and I wonder how this is possible: again, they are creatures of the Plane Of Fire. Fire should actually heal them.) They go invisible but attack again as soon as I am visible, can't backstab, and despite their fearsome swords are not even a match for me in straight combat. There is a Director, very much like a Beholder, here...its spells are more like my mage spells than a Beholder's innate ray spells. It ends up damaging itself severely by casting Ice Storm near itself. It goes down with a few Staff hits. When I have collected all seven pieces, the Death Mask Of King Strohm III forms itself, and I can enter the lair of the Guardian. The Guardian itself is a Greater Fire Elemental, as blinded to me with the Staff's effects as a Glitterdusted Gibberling. I finish it with the Sling as it seems one of the rare enemies less resistant to piercing than blunt damage. Inside the room that the Guardian was protecting, I find a hidden treasure cache containing a Dragonslayer sword and a Dragon Shield. I can't use either, but they will doubtless fetch a good coin, and they certainly confirm indisputably with all the other evidence that Lord Jierden Firkraag is a dragon, who assumed human form when he met me in the Copper Coronet. Given the "Fir" in his name, which he distinctly pronounced "fire" rather than "fur", he's probably a Red. Ouch!

Samia has prepared a little surprise for me. I suspect Firkraag was her target as well, and she wanted the blade and shield I just retrieved, not some tome. She ambushes me as I leave the treasure cache room, and has several of her little friends with her. I save the treacherous bitch (excuse my language, journal, but my anger at her betrayal was so thick as to have substance) for last, killing all of her friends one by one, starting with the mage, and not taking a single hit of damage. They drink their healing potions when they are nearly dead, but I will bet my last gold piece I have more bullets than they have potions, hmmm? When she alone remains, I Stoneskin and see just how tough she is in a fair fight. I score three critical hits on her in a row (such odds!) and she dies just as the last of my Stoneskins vanishes. Her troupe and her drop a wealth of magical armour and weapons.

Passing through the area Samia was in, I find a trio of Greater Wolfweres and some Dread Wolves. I don't even bother with them. Greater Wolfweres regenerate about three times as fast as I do with both Rings Of Gaxx...it takes a skilled and powerful fighter to bring one down, or a whole party, or an instant-death spell such as Chromatic Orb or Disintegrate. I don't feel like wasting my spells on a group of furballs who are too stupid to be crucial or enlightening opponents, can't give me more experience as I am at the limit, carry nothing, and will probably make their saving throws anyways, so I invisibly pass them by.

The area I am in now has a deep chasm crossed by a narrow plank bridge to the north, and a well. I remember from the Orcish Cookbook that there is an Air Elemental down there, so I reach deep into the bag, blow the dust off the Staff Of Air +2, and peek down the well. I find a saleable magical helmet (the Dragon Helm...go figure) and the promised Greater Air Elemental. One hit from the Staff Of Air and it is history. Across the narrow bridge is another Adamantite Golem, two Stone Golems and a host of Orogs. The Adamantite can't cross the narrow bridge, and none of the opponents have ranged weapons. Using my noodle, I walk up the bridge to just before fist range of the Adamantite, so that all the other enemies clump behind it trying to get close to me. I then walk back a bit, and pick them all off at my leisure one by one with the Sling, saving Mr. Big And Shiny to last.

I head west, find another Greater Wolfwere and a few Wolfweres, and a room with a table and chest. The chest contains an interesting device called the Horn Of Blasting which does 2-20 damage and stuns all enemies once per day. I wonder if Maheer can upgrade this one as well. There are also some useful spell scrolls here too. To the north, a few of Firkraag's flunkies; the "human" goes Wolfwere and attacks the Troll and Hobgoblin...I bash his head in. There is another area here full of golems including an Adamantite. Not needing the experience, I simply walk to the back of it invisibly, take the Heartseeker +3 longbow, Berjuril gem and Moonbar gems from the hidden cache, and leave, going back north on the plank bridge.

Down a curving flight of stairs, who should I meet but a resurrected Tazok, Sarevok's half-ogre toadie, the one who ran the bandit camp. No idea what he's doing here, but he's working for Firkraag. As brash as his threats and those of the others with him (three Orcs, and Chief DigDag of the Orogs) they are all dumb sword-swingers with no skills, who can't see me when invisible, and fall to Sling bullets without me taking a scratch of damage. In a hutch in the room I find a cache rivaling anything else so far: several hundred gold, two Rogue Stones, A King's Tears, and two spells I haven't found so far: Minor Sequencer and Teleport Field. Garren Windspear's daughter Iltha is here in a prison cell as well. The key is with a mage...below. Where Firkraag waits.

Firkraag is indeed a Red Dragon, a giant beast...strangely beautiful to behold. Such creatures are intelligent, conversant, elegant and rare, but unfortunately unswayably nasty. Without Garren Windspear's help, I would have been pursued to the death by paladins forevermore because of this dragon, and it has stolen his lands, his daughter, and probably tried to kill Gorion by its own description. It knows of my past, of Irenicus, of my lineage. It must end here.

Red Dragons are the classic firebreathers. My Protection From Fire Scroll is still active for 50% fire resistance. I have a Potion of Fire Resistance for another 50% if required, and a Ring of Fire Resistance for another 40%. As well, I am sure to wear the Belt Of Inertial Barrier for +5 Breath Weapon saves and 50% magic damage resistance on top of that, and cast Protection from Energy at a critical time for a further 75%. I defeated the Shadow Dragon without too much trouble. I may just survive this encounter.

I certainly survive the encounter with Firkraag's pet mage Conster, who can't see me with the Staff equipped. I know the wily Firkraag just sent him forth to waste my spells. Instead, I don't waste a single one on Conster. Iltha is freed with Conster's key and departs. Only the Firkraag and I remain, and some far-off Greater Wolfweres.

Ten minutes later, only the distant howls of Greater Wolfweres will pierce the ominous silence of the dungeon...

Returning to Firkraag's lair, I am well-prepared for him, the tactics of the battle with the Shadow Dragon still fresh in my mind. I still have the five Skull Traps memorized, and now have two Lower Resistances as well. I am already 90% fire resistant from the scroll and Ring of Fire Resistance (one of the few occasions I would dare remove a Ring Of Gaxx in battle.) I arrange the five Skull Traps in a neat line midway between Firkraag and the doorway, far enough from myself and him that they will not immediately trigger. I equip the Wand Of Monster Summoning and the Potion Of Fire Resistance in addition to the Wand Of Cloudkill. I move forward to the north of Firkraag and summon Ogres with the Wand. They do not attack him as he is not hostile. I cast Lower Resistance, and 27% of his magic resistance falls away. He goes hostile, Stoneskins, hastes and attacks the Ogres. While he is busy shredding them like paper dolls, I cast Lower Resistance a second time, and another 27% falls away. He is now almost naked against magical attacks. His Wing Buffet knocks me unconscious and sprawling almost the length of the cathedral-sized lair, but his attacks focus on the Ogres. I return to the fray and lead him over the Skull Traps. Only two of them explode, but both damage him. Just before he breathes fire, I quaff the Fire Resistance potion and I am now 140% fire resistant. My pleasure at being completely immune to the fireball that engulfs me shortly thereafter is indescribable. I run towards the back of the room again, and he follows me, setting off another of the Skull Traps which also damage him. I turn, drop a Cloudkill and then another Monster Summoning in quick succession. As the Shadow Dragon did, he stands in the poison to kill them. I cast Protection From Energy, then he breathes again, toasting all the summons (some for over 100 points of damage!) I am not singed in the slightest. He is now Badly Injured. Back I lead him again through the poison gas to the remaining Skull Traps, taking a couple of nasty 15-20 point knocks, but nothing Gaxx won't fix. The two remaining trigger, and he is Near Death. I throw another Monster Summoning at him, then Magic Missile (all of them damage him; his magic resistance is close to zero,) then use the Horn Of Blasting I found upstairs. Firkraag drops like a ton of bricks as red as his scales, and the battle is over.

His treasures, like those of so many other battles, aren't useful to me, but I have fought a creature that would have challenged a small army, alone, and won. This is reward enough. One of the treasures is a two-handed paladin's sword called Carsomyr. It is the easily the most powerful weapon that doesn't need wheels that I have ever seen, or even heard of. Far more damaging then my Staff Of The Magi...but no invisibility, and that is the key to it all, no? You can't fight a dragon with invisibility, but you can fight everything leading up to him, and win the treasures and gold to buy items that will enable you to fight him. Firkraag's red scales will make very strong armour, more so than metal Full Plate, with built-in fire resistance...a fighter could wear it and the Ring and never need a scroll or spell to be nearly immune to fire. However this is all moot to me. Firkraag is no more; I depart the Windspear Hills forever, laden with treasures and wondering what I will find next, stopping only to say goodbye to the freed and reunited Garren and Ilsha Windspear.

Day 29
------
Trademeet is half the distance to Athkatla, so a good place to sell off the goods I have harvested. My 51,000 gold turns into 86,000, more money than I could possibly know what to do with at this stage. I arrive at night, and the only remaining merchant is a dwarf named Wallace, but he happily buys it all. I have one last location to visit before departing this vale of tears for gods-know-how-long on the ship hired by Aran Linvail.

I journey to the D'Arnise Hold. Scouting the area, there are a couple of Trolls; easy prey. I try the Sunstone fire bullets on them when they are downed, and they work very effectively. Nalia informs me that the keep is overrun by Trolls, Yuan-Ti and who knows what else. There is a secret door in the keep wall north of the palisade she has retreated too, along with the captain of the guard. A few people are still trapped in the keep.

I enter the secret entrance and rest, memorizing plenty of fiery spells beforehand: Flame Arrow, Agannazar's Scorcher, and Burning Hands. I am awakened by a couple of Yuan-Ti, but I send them to eternal rest for disturbing mine with Staff alone...they can't damage me nearly as fast as I regenerate. I find plenty of trolls indeed, but they are no match for me one-on-one, so I use the Staff of Rynn to damage them faster as they regenerate with such speed. All the larger ones do piercing damage, and my -7 Armour Class becomes -10 against them. When they are down, a fire spell does them in every time. I have a problem with the Spirit Trolls on the first floor, but manage to do them in with Death Fog weakening them and a couple of hits from the Fire Wands. They drain my Strength for several rounds with each hit, so they aren't good to melee against. I can't target them with spells as they are under a permanent Improved Invisibility spell.

Upstairs there are more trolls, and one of those nobles I can't stand. I save her life and she insults me, calls me a peasant, and accuses me of dirtying her home. She says it is my "duty" to save those who are "above my station." Briefly tempted to deal with her as I did the trolls, instead she sulks off, probably to powder her pretty nose. Her guard accompanies her. In the room by the stairs I came up to this floor on, I find a secret door (in addition to a Flamestrike trap in the fireplace protecting a Frost Wand.) There are a few trolls in the rooms beyond, and a possessed fighter named Gracais who mentions the sorcery of his master before attacking me. He hastes himself, but the Staff dispels that easily and he is no match for the Sling's bullets. He carries another of the heads of the Flail Of The Ages, a relic weapon that Lord D'Arnise was going to put together to fight the trolls with before being abducted. I strongly doubt he lives. I now have two heads of the three, not that it makes any difference to me.

Beyond that room is another secret door, and a chapel containing five Golems: two Flesh, one Clay, one Stone, and one large Iron in the centre. There are three statues containing magical items (including another of the flail heads; now I have all three.) When I take anything from each statue, it activates one or more of the Golems. They are all easy kills with the Staff, except the Iron Golem, whom I lure to the door. It can't fit through and a few sling bullets bring it down.

The other part of this secret area is a set of stairs to the basement. I descend. There are no enemies in the dank cellar room I find myself in, but through the door are more Trolls, and beyond that five Umber Hulks, those ugly and strong beetles that cast Confusion. While holding the Staff, I am totally immune to this. I know that if I were in dire straits, I could kill the dogs near the pens outside, cook their flesh on the upstairs stove and tempt the Umber Hulks into the prison area to the south with it (as Umber Hulks like dog meat, for some reason,) but I know another way to take them out that is even better: I lure the Trolls and Umber Hulks together by popping out of invisibility at strategic times, and hit the Wand Of Cloudkill. Three of the Umber Hulks drop dead immediately, having poor saving throws and low hit dice. Next round, the other two are dead. The trolls are damaged and I can isolate them when the Cloudkill is gone and take them out with the Staff Of Rynn.

Another chapel is here, and it holds the protagonist of these troubles at the Keep: TorGal the Troll and two of his friends. For them, I Stoneskin and Improved Haste from a Ring Of Gaxx and they fall. TorGal doesn't even need fire to finish him for some reason; he dies as he falls. I take a lot of damage in the process but nothing serious; within thirty seconds I am back to uninjured state. I find gold and gems hidden in a hollow column...near the body of the unfortunate Lord D'Arnise, who must have died protecting the location of this cache. Such a waste...I could have loaned him ten times that much to recoup his losses and still never wanted for anything.

I leave the basement, and the few chests I cannot open, doubtful they hold anything of real interest, though I found a few spells I didn't have. Returning to the main floor, I reforge the Flail Of Ages on the magical forge to the west of the main hall. It is indeed a powerful weapon, a +3 flail whose three heads add one point of acid, cold, and fire damage per strike. The ideal troll killer...if only I could use it.

There are stairs to the roof here; there are a few Yuan-Ti there but they are easy opponents with the Sling. As I come through the main hall, I encounter a Spirit Troll I had missed. I can't target him with spells, so I Stoneskin, but not until he has sucked two points of Strength away. I need two Improved Hastes from the Ring Of Gaxx to bring him down (and I wonder what's so improved about it...it lasts about two rounds.) I hit him with the Fire Wand when he's down, not wanting to risk him getting back up again. In the main courtyard, another ugly Otyugh. By my standing between the well and a rock beside it, it's in the same situation as the others were of being too wide to attack me; I take no damage. I pass by the dogs a second time...I think I may be done here. I check the keep thoroughly, and my enemies are no more.

Day 30
------
I return to a rather anti-climactic reaction from the residents. After having risked life and limb to save their home, gathering only a few token items in reward, and asking for nothing more, the lady of the keep is as snotty as ever, and I feel the blood boil within my head. Nalia wants to join me; as the Lord of the keep is dead and there is no male warrior to replace him, it will fall to the Roenalls, another group of nobles who may even be snottier if this is possible. I travel alone, always have, always will, so she tells me that she will waste away here, and that there is no fighting man to replace her father. Hello? Toril calling Nalia...any intelligent life out there? I just went toe-to-toe with twenty Trolls and ten Yuan-Ti...and I'm not a fighting man? And may I remind you that Mr. Irreplaceable Fighting Man got his ass handed to him within hour one, and I had to be dragged out here to clean his dirty laundry? She leaves. I wouldn't want such a sucky self-defeatist in my group if I had one anyways. I promise myself that the next snotty noble I meet will wish I hadn't. I leave the D'Arnises to their cold, drafty barn of a home and return to Athkatla in disgust. For all the good I have done in the short time I have been traveling, I am for once really glad that I don't have that pegged on my alignment...those of good alignment are supposed to bow and scrape to idiots like the D'Arnises, for some gods-know-why reason. Personally I think useless, snotty, leech nobles are as evil as any Trolls or Yuan-Ti could ever be...and those so-called monsters don't treat their own, especially their saviours, like garbage.

Day 31
------
My payback is not long in coming. After selling off some D'Arnise trinkets, I break a hundred thousand gold pieces. I remember I have an unresolved matter of the man I found buried in the cemetery, and the piece of red cloth he gave me. In the Bridge District, I see a fellow in deep red near the docks, by the name of Am-Si. Confronting him with what I know, he runs to a nearby house, and his partners kill him for his sloppiness; he drops a pair of boots called the Boots Of Avoidance that knock 5 off one's Armour Class vs. missile weapons. I take one of them down, but the other gets away. Upstairs...guess what I find? It's an arrogant fop noblewoman, who calls me "peasant" though I could buy out her whole family, and just rescued her. Well, this knight's shining armour is a little rusty, so I will be collecting that ransom before you go anywhere. The D'Arnises already got the freebee. A note in the bookshelf says to meet another nobleman named Welther in front of the Copper Coronet at night. It's daytime, but I need rest after my journey, my spells are exhausted and need changing (won't be meeting that many trolls for a while) so I rest at the Copper Coronet, then meet Welther. The only ransom option I have is a ridiculous pair of Silver Pantaloons. I another ridiculous noble who gave me the pair of Golden Pantaloons in the Friendly Arm Inn, away back when I had just left Candlekeep. He had mistaken me for his launderer. Do all nobles think anyone who isn't a noble is automatically their servant? My reputation goes down two points to 18...which is exactly what I wanted.

I return to the house, knowing full well that there is going to be an ambush...and I am not disappointed. I had sworn long ago to never trust the Cowled Ones, and two Cowled Enforcers appear, with five Amnish Legionaries. I simply go invisible and Summon Hakeashar. The Legionaries non-magical spears can't touch it, and it drains most of the Cowled Enforcers' spells, until one of them casts Death Spell on it, which kills summons so can't be resisted by it. They are drained. I fire a Cloudkill into the centre of the room and the Cowled Enforcers fall. The Amnish Legionaries are all severely injured. I get jammed into a corner by them when invisible, so simply cast Monster Summoning I to draw them across the room away from me. One Skull Trap fells three of the five, and the other two go down to the Sling and Staff. Every man-jack of them is wearing Full Plate Mail, and one of the Cowled Ones drops a Laeral's Tear necklace. I lose no reputation and sell the goods off, along with some other items I still had from beforehand, and am up to 116,000 gold pieces. I stop off at the Adventure Mart, buy all Ribald's Oils Of Speed (knowing how short the Improved Haste duration is) and a Symbol: Stun scroll from Lady Yuth.

Having satisfied both my vows of anger at once, I will return to calmer acts of goodness. I had to leave the mainland anyway...this seems as good a time as any. I drop a few more unneeded items into the hollow lion's head in the Promenade. Soon I will meet with Aran Linvail and depart Athkatla, probably for a very long time.

Before I leave, there are two more places I would like to sate my curiosity about. One is a Guarded Compound in the Temple District; I can obtain no more of a description. The second is a locked area in the sewers there. When Tazok fell for the second time in the Windspear Hills he dropped a "Sewer Key". I had found this locked door previously, and there were no sewers in Firkraag's lair. This must be the key for this area.

First, I check the Guarded Compound. When I enter, a mage and a thief "greet" me, saying the wards are down and any riff-raff (such as I) can wander in. They then disappear upstairs...I have a bad feeling of a trap walking towards the stairs, but I have long known that the Boots Of Speed give me such a quick and light step that I can often walk right over traps without setting them off. Nothing happens, and I go to the upstairs. There is the mage, thief, and a few others there: a cleric, an Orog, a Minotaur, and a dual-wielding fighter. Clearly this Guarded Compound is something unsavory. I throw on the Cloak Of Non-Detection, go invisible, clump them and send a couple of Skull Traps their way. The mage and thief go down, which is good, as the thief turns out to have 8 more invisibility potions. The cleric is next with the Staff dispelling his Blade Barrier and then helping his spirituality by moving him closer to his god. After that the remaining opponents fall to the Sling, though the Minotaur has an insanely low Armour Class for not wearing armour, and he and the Orug drink potions when they get nearly dead. I stomp a trap that spills acid on me and holds me for a second or two, but I get better.

When they are down, I can't believe the treasure trove. Nearly all of their weapons and armour are magical. I find an amazing katana on the body of the dual-wielding fighter: Celestial Fury, a +3 that stuns with every strike if targets fail their Save Vs. Spell and does a few other nice things too...one of those weapons that it's almost worth Dual Classing for, but I fear I have come too far to be able to do that. There are chests and tables all over, some trapped, so I throw on the protections (Belt Of Inertial Barrier, Cloak Of Displacement) and open what I can. I run out of Knocks and there are many I can't force, but this place was a gold mine in every sense of the word.

I visit my old friend Roger the Fence in the sewers on the way to the hidden area, and sell it all off.

Day 32
------
I open the secret door on the northeast wall of the sewers with the Sewer Key easily. There are many dead bodies here, but not a mark on them. Approaching the stairs, I am held for a short time by something of a mind unknown that slips into my thoughts like...tentacles. There are Illithids here...Mind Flayers...tentacled things, not of this world; the race that subdued and enslaved the noble Githzerai and barbaric Githyanki until a Githzerai slave named Zerthimon learned the Scripture of Steel and removed their taint, teaching his people of their vulnerability to weapons. They can kill a powerful man instantly at a distance by psychically blasting his mind to mush through powers known as Psionics, or dominate him so that he turns on his allies. If they touch, Intelligence vanishes for a short time. When there is none left, death occurs instantly and irreversibly. And, they are almost completely magic resistant.

Their Psionic Blasts and Dominations are spells. I am well-prepared. You may remember how I had desperately pushed to reduce as many of my saves, such as Save Vs. Spells, to 1 or less through magical items such as the Rings of Gaxx and Staff Of The Magi...if for no other reason than to face these creatures. Without them, I would not last ten seconds. With them, I am almost immune. I say almost as there is no defense from the temporary loss of five Intelligence points if physically touched by one. I will be touched by a few, as there is no way I would ever let go of the Staff and the two critical points it removes from my Save. Vs. Spells. I ascend the stairs...slowly.

I emerge into an empty circular room, garishly decorated in some alien scheme. The next room is not empty. An Illithid has dominated several humans: two fighters, two archers, a cleric and mage, and has a pet Umber Hulk. At this point, the Umber Hulk is the most dangerous to me: its Confusion carries a penalty to its save of -2, while the Illithids' Psionic Blast carries no penalty that I know of. Wanting it out of the way immediately, I cast Chromatic Orb. As I proved in the D'Arnise Hold, Umber Hulks have poor saving throws, and its glowing life-force emerges as it dies. Illithids and Umber Hulks' spells are innate abilities, like those of Beholders having no casting time, and this is what makes them so dangerous. Even briefly popping out of invisibility is enough time for them to discharge their energies towards me.

I kill the Mind Flayer with the Staff and ignore the humans for now. Perhaps their domination will lift when the Illithid are destroyed. Through a door and then a narrow hallway, another round room holds many Illithid and Umber Hulks. Cloudkill worked very well on the Umber Hulks before. Casting Blur improves my saving throws by 1, so I do. I discharge a Cloudkill into the centre of the room. Several Mind Flayers immediately lash out their Psionic Blasts but I am immune. The Umber Hulks manage to throw some Confusions at me but I make my saves...I would have to roll a 1 of 20 to fail. They die immediately after. While the Illithid are magic resistant, the poison of the gas is biological rather than magical, and they are susceptible. There is another room to the north of this; there must be more Illithid there. I go invisible right in the centre of the gas so the Illithid will cluster there at the point they last saw me, then run north. Yes, more of them. I go visible by whacking one (unwielding the Staff would be a truly stupid action) and then lure them south into the centre of the poison and go invisible again. They all take heavy damage and all the Umber Hulks are dead. Surely Cloudkill is my favourite wand at this point. Such a useful spell! I finish the rest with the Staff, popping back into invisibility after each strike, or when touched by one, which reduces my Intelligence to 14 for a short time. I don't want to risk it going any lower.

When I return to the northern round room, only one remains and it is the leader. Although it is an Illithid, it sounds like a Hobgoblin, saying "Spare no one!" and "No-o-o...." in a trembly voice when injured. It dies without incident. In the central vat, I find a Wand Of Wonder (good to sell, terrible to use: its effects are random and can be fatal to the mage who wields it) a scroll that details what the Illithids are up to, and the Hammer Of Thunderbolts +3. This is the hammer that is the major component of the superweapon Crom Faeyr...which...ah well. It will sell for a good sum. On the way out I deal with the humans. They are still dominated and must be dealt with by Staff and Sling. None of them have anything worthwhile.

I emerge, squinting, into bright sunlight. The first person I see through the haze of light is a Priest Of Talos, a Talon, hawking his temple and god in the Temple district, as other temples hawk their gods...a bazaar of the spirit. It is said that Talos is evil...but these people haven't bothered me, so I let them alone. Be there a Talos, I can't think of anything less evil: without rain and the storms that occasionally accompany it, plant life would die and everything else along with it, other than magically animated creatures or all things bizarre. The destruction of a storm is random, not directed. Evil is malicious intent, storms...they just are. We are just too small and fragile to matter to one; like a man accidentally stepping on an ant he didn't notice, there is no directed intent. So I throw a friendly nod to him as I pass and he returns it, and the same nod and return to the priest of Lathander, for the creative energy that allows me to exist and life to renew, and same nod and return to the priest of Helm, for the nobility and honour that can exist within us, fragile beings though we are. And in my mind I say goodbye to them, goodbye for now and perhaps forever...may you find that god you claim to know, whatever it may be. And I leave Athkatla and don't look back.

Days 33 - 39
------------
At sea. Nothing much happens, no other ships are sighted. I relax and catch up on rest. Aran Linvail came through for me and has secured the services of captain Saemon Havarian, as well as sending a female assassin named Sime to advise me and make sure Havarian doesn't pull a double-cross. She is a sultry and enticing vixen with a voice that makes the hairs stand up on the back of my neck, and there's something mysterious and appealing about thieves' garb, but the thought of her five-times backstab prevents me telling her I think this (and I don't look dapper in Stoneskin.) I trust the stuffed-shirt blowhard captain Havarian about as far as I can spit one of his bilge rats, of which there are plenty, but I don't have much choice. Not many captains will charter to this island as it is run by pirates and Spellhold is as gloomy of a place as any dungeon. 

Day 40
------
We land. Havarian proves almost immediately to be a scumbag as he has turned me in to the vampires. Three of them meet us as I disembark. They are ridiculously easy: clumping them far from Sime with strategic invisibility, one Skull Trap kills two of them outright, and the third falls to a fire column from the Wand. I will let Sime recover; she must be in shock at the betrayal as she keeps saying "Saemon looks nervous. Find out what he wants." over and over, though Saemon is long-gone.

It's hard to shake the relaxation of the voyage, and I find myself exploring casually for now, discovering the terraced town of Brynnlaw to be among the prettiest places I have ever been. With the moon reflecting off the sea to the horizon as I climb ever higher the terraces that ensure everyone has a good view, and all the town bathed in the iridescent blue of night, I want to give up my traveling and live here a while. Perhaps I could finally fulfill one of my dream goals, booting the Cowled Ones out of Spellhold, and turning it into a school of magic...it would make a perfect place from the powerful wards that prevent imprisoned mages from leaving or sending magical energy to the outside world. I wouldn't just teach mages, either. I'd teach fighters the value of Stoneskin, and thieves the subtle joys of Improved Invisibility, all the while taking in that far-off horizon and the smell of the sea air...ah...

Unfortunately the place is run by pirates. Fortunately they are rum-soaked idiots who can barely hold their swords without falling over. I am attacked by several and if they are lucky in melee, they might get one hit on me before I send them to whatever hell pirates go to (probably a place just like Faerun, but without any alcohol.) There doesn't seem to be a shop here, but I manage to find one in the northwest on the second terrace up. There is no sign so I just have to blunder into it. I sell off some dead pirate gear. I also find a Temple Of Umberlee. I happen to check whether the irritable priestess has anything interesting to sell, and she does: the Girdle Of Bluntness. It improves my Armour Class by 4 against blunt and crushing weapons, such as staffs, flails, maces, and golems' fists. I have been looking for something like this for a while. I also buy two more Protection From Undead scrolls...one can never have too many.

A young boy named Ason picks 10 gold pieces out of my pocket...I ask him why he does it, and he replies that he will be beaten if he doesn't, then leaves. Later, I meet his sister, a pretty girl approaching womanhood by the name of Ginia, and she has explained just what has gone on in Brynnlaw: the pirate lord Desharik was driven here by the loss of a battle. He killed the mayor, dumped his body in the sea, and the pirates stole her father's home. He was killed trying to break into it, and the pirate lord's right-hand-man Chremy is now her slaveowner, forcing her to sell herself, and her brother to pick pockets. I confront Chremy; he makes the mistake of fighting and dies not having touched me, and I don't need anything but the Staff. I talk to a smuggler named Calahan and he will ship them out for 100gp apiece. I have too much money so it's no loss, and Calahan...Calahan...ahh, an old friend...Calahan from Ulgoth's Beard. I guess I'll always find the salt in pretty seaside towns. Turns out he was kicked out of Ulgoth's for his tales about Mistress Malory, though as tall as they sound Calahan's tales always turn out to be the truth (like the one he told about Mendas of Waterdeep being a bad sort...turned out he was a Greater Wolfwere, but I didn't get to find out until I had to wipe out his clan and then him too.) Nice to see a familiar face here.

I end up finding a whole barful of familiar faces at the local focus, the Vulgar Monkey tavern. I met all these sailors back in Baldur's Gate city, in Jopalin's Tavern. They were sailors then but are calling themselves pirates now, though a lot more sociable than the ones I met outside. There is a mage here named Sanik who appears to have some information for me, but an assassin dimension-doors in and kills him before he can give it to me, then attacks me. He goes down easily with the Staff. The innkeeper is so incensed that someone would try an assassination in his place that he breaks his usual innkeeper's silence and tells me that Sanik was murdered for falling in love with a courtesan named Claire and announcing she was his wife; he was planning on leaving with her. She is at the Courtesan's Guild, run by a woman named Galvena. I pay a courtesan 100 gold pieces to get me into the guild on the premise of sleeping with her, but instead ask her where Claire is. She isn't sure, but hopes I will kill Miss Galvena for her. I'm sure I will have to.

I explore the hidden areas of the "Festhall". Two guards confront me but I convince them I am their superior as I have the medallion from the body of Chremy that employees here wear. I enter a room that turns out to be Miss Galvena's bedroom and the Guard Captain attacks me. He is using a mace so I try out my new Girdle Of Bluntness and handily wipe the floor with him with the Staff, no invisibility required. I can now outfight most of the fighters I run into. I find a key on the shelf for all the doors in the premises.

I have underestimated this Guard Captain, as even though I just killed him, he reappears when I leave the room for the hallway. All three guards attack me, but they are easy with the Staff and Sling. One drops a +2 halberd. I had still outfought him in melee with the Staff, as I had reworn the Girdle Of Piercing. I hope the Captain will stay dead this time. I descend and find Lady Galvena and a mage named Vadek. They are about to kill Claire, but try me first. They don't get far. Vadek doesn't even have True Sight and wastes most of his spells when I pop into invisibility. Another notch on the Staff. Clair wields a +2 flail, but the Girdle Of Bluntness leaves me untouched by her in melee, and her leather armour crumples beneath Staff blows. Claire guides me to the docks and a friendly elven Captain Golin, who tells me the two ways into Spellhold are either with a wardstone from Perth The Adept, a Cowled Wizard who is a little touched, or pretending to be crazy. I like the thought of it being necessary to rid the world of another Cowled Wizard, so I think I will try that method. As he is Adept, I will put the Cloak Of Non-Detection on when I meet him. Sime is STILL here, and still in shock, saying nothing but "Saemon looks nervous. See what he wants." So much for advising me; I am on my own. I have always been.

I find Perth in an ornate, domed home on the high terrace, east side of town. He is insane but adept, casting True Sight (yes, I wore the Cloak) throwing up a Spell Trap and Sequencer, then a Simulacrum. Not knowing what else he has up his sleeve, I simply whack him once with the Staff to get rid of his Stoneskins, cast Summon Hakeashar, and then relax invisibly in a corner while he is sucked dry of spells, injures himself with a fireball that kills his Simulacrum (I love it when they do that,) then gets killed by the Hakeashar's tiny 3 hit point attacks. Were I not at my limit, I would have received 20,000 experience points for him, pushover that he was. I Knock open a chest and find nothing interesting. I retrieve the wardstone from his body and a strange book called the Book Of Infinite Spells which gives non-wizards spells written in plain Common so anyone can cast them once a day. Rather like what I wanted to do with my school of magic: give the power of magic to non-wizards and well as dedicated mages (whom I would handpick to try to ensure that they wouldn't abuse it.) I will have to keep this, if for nothing but sentimental value.

At the far northern reach of Brynnlaw is a nearly hidden pathway that leads to Spellhold. I am not afraid of what I will find there. I cross over a bridge to the feared asylum: its proper name is the Residence For The Magically Deviant. I have to fight a few Lizard Men (very easy; I take on all four at once with only the Staff and wearing the Girdle of Piercing) and an Air Elemental. The Elemental makes its save vs. the Staff Of Air +2 and kicks me around a bit. Back in the bag goes the Staff Of Air and I kill the Elemental with the Sling.

I enter the asylum and speak with "the co-ordinator". The voice is unmistakable: it is Jon Irenicus in disguise. He claims this is a benevolent place, and I meet several inmates: Dili (a child who can shapeshift), Wanev (the last co-ordinator, who still thinks he's in control and gives me some "memos") Naljier Skal (an embrogued bard who can conjure gems,) and Aphril (who can not only see extraplanar creatures, but can make them partially visible to others...an unnerving experience.) There are two more, but I already know them. The first is Tiax, a Cyrician though harmless, that I had met in Baldur's Gate. He had humourous delusions of grandeur, and invited me to help his tiny self rule the world. Rather glad I declined. The second is Dradeel, the elven mage who was a close associate of the famous Balduran, founder of Baldur's Gate. I had found him hiding in a hut in the midst of an island full of werewolves on the quest for Mendas of Waterdeep (who wasn't) that I mentioned earlier. The last survivor of Balduran's associates, he had been trapped there for a longer time than I care to imagine, perhaps hundreds of years. I had freed him by retrieving his spellbook from Balduran's ship, which was guarded by demi-canines of all varieties. Obviously he never got over the experience. He rants a little about dogs and wolves, then gives me a recipe (he was an amateur chef then too.)

At this point, things get a little bit strange. Imoen, whom I came all this way to find out about, is there. Irenicus finally reveals himself (as if I hadn't guessed) and I get to find out about Saemon Havarian's second treachery towards me: he had slipped a spell component into my food during the voyage. Irenicus is able to render me unconscious with a simple, silent cantrip. I don't even get a saving throw.

When I awaken, I feel like Irenicus' in vitro subjects did, back in his underground lab. He speaks to me through the walls of the jar. He says that Imoen is another child of Bhaal. To many, this would make her my sister, and I say sister rather than half-sister as Bhaal sired many children from all the humanoid races during the Time Of Troubles, but always they were as their mother: the children of elven mothers were completely elves, those of the dwarven mothers completely dwarves and so forth, and of half-human mothers (such as half-elves and half-orcs) were also half-elves or half-orcs. Call this a callous and overlogical interpretation, but this would indicate there is no connection between the children of Bhaal, no siblinghood whatsoever. They are related by divinity but not biology, being as if they were magically spawned asexually from their mother, though bearing some essence of the dead "god" but not his true paternal heritage. So Imoen is not my sister. She is a child of Bhaal, I am a child of Bhaal, but saying that she is my sibling assumes a normal parentage, which this certainly was not.

He also expects me to die. He casts a spell the likes of which I haven't seen before, and the Shadow Thieves in other jars lining the lab fall, one by one, as if struck by a Chromatic Orb or Finger Of Death. At least their deaths are instantaneous and painless. Now I know why Bodhi was "recruiting" them: thieves are anonymous, often using false names and living in hiding, and no law enforcers will investigate the disappearance of thieves, being glad to be rid of them, so they are spell fodder for Irenicus that no one will miss...no one but their leader and their fellow thieves. When they are all dead, I fall too, but I don't die...

Instead I end up in Candlekeep, but not like I remember it. This is a Candlekeep so far removed from reality as to be outside of all the planes that are or ever were. I gradually come to the realization that I am not dead or in another place, but in some sort of a dream of dementia that a dying mind would produce...this scene is familiar to me from previous normal dreams I have had. Imoen calls to me; in order to enter the "library" to find her, I have to sacrifice something to the demon who guards the door. I choose to sacrifice one point of my Wisdom. I enter the library, and Imoen tells me to "find the beast and lead him to me" Leaving the library, I find the beast she refers to: Bhaal himself, appearing just as Sarevok did. I lure him into the library and Imoen announces that he can now be defeated. I turn the Sling on him, and he falls quickly without me being hurt. However, Imoen screams "not again" and disappears, and just before I awaken, I suddenly know what Imoen is: I am visualizing my own "soul" in the only way I can, having found that Imoen's springs from the same source. Her disappearance marked the success of Irenicus in sucking the essence out of me.

When I come back to reality, Irenicus announces that he has indeed stolen my "soul", and that I will wither and die now; he is not lying: my Bhaalspawn abilities have all vanished. No Cure Light Wounds and Larloch's Minor Drain (no loss) but no Horror either. Bodhi escorts Imoen and I to a dungeon beneath Spellhold to have a little "fun" with us, then departs. I explore, first to the west. As I climb the stairs I feel strange; it must be the hollowness of having my spirit removed. I find a small room with some annoying gibberlings and a few items. Just to the west of there further along the hall, a puzzle room, lined with statues, and a chest in the centre filled with assorted items. Each statue has a riddle, and an item placed into the statue's arms answers it. The riddles are easy enough, but the whole puzzle is made even easier by all the items except one (the boots) already being in the chest in the correct order, counterclockwise from the door. Well, they were testing insane people here...they couldn't be that difficult to challenge. When I am done with the puzzle, I have earned an Ioun Stone and a strange gem in addition to the one I found in the gibberling room. They must be portal keys out of here.

Further along the hall is chamber with many Mephits, a Rukh Rakshasa and a glimmering portal. I clump them and one Skull trap kills all the Mephits; the Rukh is immune so falls to the Sling. When I touch the portal, a Pit Fiend emerges...but no problem. This one doesn't stun or death-gaze, so I lead it back down the hall to the puzzle room. Its wings are too wide for it to fit through the door, so is helplessly stuck there while I rain Sling bullets on it until it sinks back to the Abyss. When I touch the portal again, expecting another enemy, a Djinn appears instead and rewards me with...a nice suit of armour I can't use. Argh!

I continue. Another puzzle-room has a statue in the middle and faces along the walls asking me to put my hand in their mouths. When I do, I am teleported into the walled-off statue chamber, and the statue asks me riddles. They aren't very hard (come on, I have a 19 Intelligence...challenge me!) When I finish I gain a Ring Of Regeneration. No use to me now, though the one Lhaeozarus picked from Ribald was about the most important item I had when I began this trek through Amn. Beyond that, a group of Yuan-Ti including a mage. I draw them out individually and cut them down with the sling. I can melee them one at a time with little damage that I recover in seconds from. The mage falls to the Staff, and I continue around the sharp bend..and stop dead in my tracks, my heart racing. Through the walls are huge hydraulic pistons...the opposing walls of this hallway are like teeth that merge together....when they close. I was steps from instant death, and only my wits saved me. I simply backtrack to the chamber I was first brought to and try another stairway. There is a Clay Golem in the room at the top of the north stairs. I decide to test something; I throw on the Girdle Of Bluntness, and engage it in melee combat with the Staff. I beat it handily, with no invisibility or spell protections. When it hastes itself, the Staff dispels the haste on the next strike and the Girdle makes my Armour Class -12 against its fists. I find a Bag Of Holding here, but I already started out with one in Irenicus' dungeon for some reason. Good thing too: it would be ridiculous to only get one now, this late in my quest of discovery. I leave it but instead take some magic ammunition that is useless to me but saleable.

I descend a level. The most noticeable thing in the room I am in is a tome, raised from the floor on a pedestal. When I read it, a Kobold appears. I think I can predict what will happen: I will read it a few more times and face progressively more difficult enemies, until I am overwhelmed and fight for my life against something awful, and then I will get some more armour. I leave the tome alone. A Wandering Horror is here; it throws a Death Fog. Having had the bad experience with one before and knowing invisibility is useless against them, I stay right away and use the Sling. South are some Yuan-Ti with mage, I lead them north into the Death Fog the Horror left and they all take some damage. I cast Sunfire which kills one and leaves the rest near death, and they go down easily. I find two excellent spell scrolls here: Simulacrum and Spirit Armour. Spirit Armour sets base Armour Class to 1 and improves all saves by 3! Nice...I should have found this earlier. Simulacrum makes another me...just what the world needs, for a short time. It's only 60% of me, but enough to act as a good distraction to enemies.

South through a long, dark hallway and then west (there is a door to the south I will check later) is an empty room...with spikes on the floor of the doorways. Must be a trap. I go invisible as I enter the room, the doors rise to trap me, and several Umber Hulks appear. And we all know what works on them, right? I fire the Cloudkill right at my feet, knowing that I may be slightly injured but cannot die instantly. I pop out of invisibility to lure them to me, then back in and run from the cloud. They all die in seconds. The doors open, there are more Hulks in the next room, I lure them into the cloud and they fall instantly as well. This hall leads to stairs out...I have still have more to explore. The door to the south I bypassed contains Greater Mummies, Skeleton Warriors and a Lich in a clump. I throw a Skull Trap into the clump which injures all the Greater Mummies, then leave to see who follows me. The Greater Mummies do. I can melee them with the Girdle Of Bluntness on as they attack with crushing damage, and I am immune to their diseases with the Rings Of Gaxx. When I get injured, I just use the Sling on them; they are slow movers and I can get two bullets off before I have to make distance. They are highly resistant to the piercing damage of the bullets so use the Staff when I can. The Lich unfortunately stuns me with Symbol: Stun. Luckily, the Staff is equipped so I am invisible to the Skeleton Warriors while it empties its spell arsenal for which I make all my saves. I will recover. I Improved Haste when I am freed and use the Staff to ensure the Lich won't. I find I still can't melee the Skeleton Warriors without taking a lot of damage, so I keep invisible between whacks to take out the archer, then use the Sling on the one with only the sword.

Several of the clay pots here and a strangely civilized drawing room hold a few saleable items, but nothing I can use. Passing into a large crypt with two huge statues, I see a central sarcophagus...and a vampire by the name of Dace. He tells me escape is useless before he attacks me, and mentions that only his hand can open the way out, and that some Kobolds hold a crystal shard. Realizing that even mediocre vampires can be difficult, I use my emergency reserve Disintegrate, crossing all the digits that don't interfere with my spellcasting. As with the Efreeti, I am successful and he dies instantly, transformed to dust, his Gaseous Form retreating to its coffin. Not knowing when I would meet another vampire, I had made sure I always had at least one set of stakes, and I use them, finding that his hand comes off and I can carry it with me, so it must be a portal key as well given his comment about it. His apparition appears and thanks me for finally delivering him to rest...why would he do that? Ah, I understand...he was the co-ordinator of the asylum that Bodhi had mentioned tested his inmates with this place, the builder, and she made him a vampire against his will.

This has certainly been the busiest day I have had so far judging by the volume of my writing...I am not tired in the least but I am running short of spells. Perhaps I will rest soon.

Day 41
------
I find the promised Kobolds right by the stairs I entered through. Though they are many and several are spellcasters, they are still Kobolds. I cast Death Fog which kills most of them immediately. When they are dead, a few more gate in including one disguised as a Xvart; I killed hundreds of these annoying blue creeps in the days before Sarevok fell and haven't seen one again up to this point. He's as easy as the rest. When no more remain, I retrieve a crystal shard from the central crystal at the cavern's focus. It will no doubt prove to be yet another key out of here.

My curiosity gets the best of me as I pass the raised tome again...the first enemy to emerge after the original Kobold Captain is a Sword Spider, followed by an Umber Hulk. I won't waste a Cloudkill on one...I only roll a 1 vs. its Confusion and still make my save...I give silent thanks to all my wonderful items. I put on the Girdle Of Bluntness, and find that Umber Hulks deal out blunt damage too. Yet another enemy I can now face in melee when required. After that, a Mind Flayer. It stuns me even while I hold the Staff (thought I would be immune) but I am invisible so it waits. When the Stun wears off, I attack it, and it flees after taking excessive damage...right through the north wall and out of sight, as I stare after it slack-jawed. I inspect the wall carefully, but no crevice or secret door do I find.

As I expected, the last to emerge is one I can't deal with. Knowing I will face Jon Irenicus I haven't used the Staff's Spell Trap and I won't do so yet, but I didn't realize that once a Beholder sees you, there's no going invisible on it. I get damaged a bit and in a difficult situation as I can't cast spells while getting hit, but drawing on better judgement I notice the angle of the walls around the Beholder, and as a billiards-player would, sight the angle of the Staff's lightning/fireball combination and trigger. The resulting bolt pierces the Beholder no less than four times through reflection, and it collapses to the floor charred black. Refreshingly, I can use all the items I obtain: Summon Fiend and Simulacrum scrolls, and a Ring Of Free Action. I don't really need the Ring with my low saving throws, but I will keep it anyway. I read Summon Fiend and put the rest away.

I leave through the doorway down the hall through where the Umber Hulks appeared, and end up back where I started, except now I have the keys to leave with. Imoen still waits, probably expecting me to talk to her, but I am not a man to be waited for...I travel my own path and keep my own agenda unfortunately. Perhaps this is selfish, but my peculiar philosophies have kept me alive, and have benefitted many others through my actions, far more than have feigned injury that someone dares be independent.

The last staircase leads to a large bust that is the doorway out of this dungeon, and is guarded by several Yuan-Ti mages, Yuan-Ti and a Greater Yuan-Ti. They are not much of a challenge anymore, and fall quickly. I forget the Cloak Of Non-Detection and their True Sight brings me out, so I lay into them, casting Fireshield to injure those who engage me in melee, Greater Malison, then the Staff's lightning/fireball, and Sunfire (while standing in the middle of their group, which slays three of the mages.) The remaining one injures his own by throwing a Skull Trap while I make my magic resistance save. I engage the Greater Yuan-Ti in melee and my Fireshield does him in, and a tap from the Staff finishes the remaining mage. Time to leave...

Instead of welcome sunshine, there is more dungeon. I find more Yuan-Ti (and the obligatory mage) with the first door I open; they go down to Staff and Sling. There are four panels on the wall with paintings of a Mind Flayer, Troll, Umber Hulk and Djinn on them. I wonder what they are for, so try one. It's a door, but locked. I leave this room for now. Just south of the stairway is a small L-shaped room that holds a rotating wheel. When I turn it, it opens a door just to the north. There are three Trolls and a Spirit Troll in here. I leave them for now, emptying the clay pot they guard and returning to invisibility. There are strange Mithril Tokens in it in addition to other items. To the south, a broken statue dominates an area with a few Minotaurs. I ignore them and instead look at a small round chamber off to the north of it. Three statues are here and a central pool. Each of the statues casts a nasty spell when touched, but they and the pool yield four paintings matching the four locked creature panels; they must be the keys. One of the spells resembles Cloudkill with a fire component, so I lure the Minotaurs and Trolls into the chamber by going visible. The Minotaurs die instantly, their bodies blackened. The trolls are weakened and easier to finish. I leave one as it doesn't matter if it dies. Returning to the panels, I open them. Each creature that appears is a lot tougher than most of its kind; luckily the Noble Djinn casts no spells, and the Umber Hulk can't see me when invisible, so I can take them down from a distance. The Spirit Troll is difficult, so I remember the tactic that felled the Beholder, lure it into the narrow cell it was trapped in after casting Protection From Energy on myself, then use the Wand Of Lightning while standing beside it invisibly. It dies instantly by the reflected bolts at a cost of a few quickly recovered hit points to myself.

The Ularthid Mind Flayer manages to stun me once, but yet again while I am invisible, so I am not harmed. I find that it does blunt damage as well, so the Girdle Of Bluntness once again proves itself a wise investment. Its morale fails but it doesn't run through a wall as the other did, and I bring it down with a Sling bullet. It drops a two-handed +2 sword that adds +10% magic resistance and does extra damage to Chaotic Evil opponents.

One of the cells is not a cell, but a doorway to another hall. Through it I find a Stone Golem which I can melee with the Girdle Of Bluntness (it only gets one minor hit on me,) and I finally find the spell scroll Maze in a clay pot, as well as more of these Mithril Tokens. To the south, a small room has a machine at the centre, and I finally know what these Tokens are for: it will dispense something for them. I will collect all I can before I try it. To the north, three Clay Golems await, and another clay pot in the hallway holds the spell scroll Phantom Blade, which conjures a sword I can use, a +3 that does an extra 10 damage vs. undead. Very handy. When I Knock open the chest, the door slams closed and the three Clay Golems go hostile, but cannot see me and the Staff fells them all, causing the door to reopen. The chest holds more Tokens, the string of the Gesen Bow that fires bolts of lightning and never needs arrows, and a Star Sapphire. Since the door can now be closed and opened by me, and there is no other way in here (and no other dungeon residents would have dared enter with the Golems present) I close the door and rest, completely undisturbed.

On awakening, I push a bit farther, dispatch a couple of trolls handily with the Staff, Girdle Of Piercing and a Scorcher and Sunstone bullet, then enter another large chamber. Bodhi and another vampire confront me just beyond that. She is determined to not let me escape, but I pull one over on her by spontaneously transforming into the avatar of Bhaal, as I have been drained of my soul, the "instinct," as Bhaal put it in my dream, is allowed to take over. I become the Slayer, a hideous monster, but a very strong, fast and deadly one. Bodhi flees in terror yet again. I will put the new form to good use while it lasts, so I open doors as fast as I can as the Slayer and luckily find a Gauth to the north, through the west door. I kill it in seconds, then transform back and kill the Minotaurs in this unfinished chamber with the Sling. A font on the west wall holds a few items. There are yet more Minotaurs in another room at the end of the hallway, but Minotaurs are easy opponents, slow and without ranged weapons. They fall without effort. I now have 21 of the strange Mithril Tokens. Before I go back to the machine I check a large statue by a locked door. It is missing its horns. When I replace them (I happened to find them but didn't know what to do with them) the door opens and I can leave whenever I feel like it.

Returning to the machine, I test it before making a decision. For 5 tokens: Boots Of The North, cold resistance. For 10: Boots of Grounding, electrical resistance. For 15: Boots Of Speed, which I already have. For 20: Jester's Chain Mail +4, a suit of chain as tough as Full Plate (though probably not against blunt weapons.) None of these are of any use to me, already having Boots Of Speed, so I use up the most tokens on the most saleable item, the armour, then depart through the door behind the re-horned statue.

If I thought things were getting strange before, I was sorely mistaken. They take a turn for the stranger. First I appear in an arena-like setting. A few Kobold Commandoes and Goblins attack me with arrows, so I put on the Cloak Of Displacement and one Sling bullet apiece is enough. When they are dead, an Apparition appears, says that I am being tested, and I am again transported, this time to a forest setting with a Spore Colony summoning Myconids (mushrooms that walk like humans and throw Confusion spores like Umber Hulks.) I put on the Girdle Of Bluntness and wield the Staff, happily bashing the Spore Colony nigh-immune to the Myconids' head-butting and Confusion. There are some hidden caches here but they are empty other than one scroll of Friends. When the Spore Colony dies, the Myconids do too, and the Apparition appears again and asks me a riddle. I remember that this is still part of the "testing area" that Dace created, so I play along. The next place is an ornate dining room with Apparitions seated about it. On the table I find a Cloak Of Reflection that makes one immune to electricity and reflects it back to the source. The Apparitions babble amongst themselves and ask me several easy riddles, and then I am somewhere else again...in a cave with three Trolls, one is Spectral. Two go down to a Skull Trap and Sunfire does them in; I don't want to risk them getting up with my slow attacks. That Sunfire also injures the remaining one, but it is not necessary to kill it as the Apparition has appeared ready to take me away. Instead, I ask to check a bizarre Troll altar. One of the Trolls lost its head. I place it on the altar, the room shakes, and I receive...a nice Bone Club that I can't use. I speak to the Apparition again, and I can move to "Judgement". One last time, I am transported I know not where, to an open stone colonnade with the scales of justice embossed in the centre of the floor. I have passed the tests that have been set to me, and I am free to leave. I search the area thoroughly, but all I find is a single silver ring in one of the orifices on the north wall, not even worth the effort to pick up.

When I descend the stairs I am back in Spellhold, just outside the laboratory where my essence was stolen. And who should greet me but the treacherous Saemon Havarian? However angry I was, I suddenly reconsider. Irenicus is certainly a powerful mage; it is quite likely, given the ease with which he felled me, that he had Havarian under some sort of geas or mind control. Saemon seems to have broken it, as he tells me of a way to defeat Irenicus...the only way according to him. Release the inmates and turn them on Irenicus. I am sure they will attack Irenicus if they can, and an army of spellcasters is handy. I will try.

I search the area. In an barrel in a storeroom to the north, I find the first part of Irenicus' journal. It confirms several of my suspicions: Bodhi is an elf, therefore so is Irenicus. Imoen's essence was stolen for Bodhi, mine for Irenicus. Clearly they were cut off from the elven community, a community whose membership confers immortality without the decay into lichdom, or any other negative effects, to its members. They are attempting to steal our souls to replace theirs. Why ours? Because we are children of Bhaal...they don't want just any souls, they want the soul of the god of murder and assassins...they are hatefully angry at being expelled and want the power of the dead god to strike back with.

I ascend the stairs, and bribe a dwarf named Lonk The Sane with 2,000 gold to free the inmates. I meet with them, and they each reply in the manner of their delusion or talent to the proposal to battle Irenicus. Only Wanev and Tiax seem enthusiastic about it, but they all certainly want him dead. Wanev dimension-doors us to the lab, and the battle begins; it is not difficult at all, especially as I don the Belt Of Inertial Barrier first. Wanev turns out to be as powerful of a mage as many liches, casting Time Stop and throwing several Symbols at Irenicus, and the others are competent as well. I am forced to fight a clone of myself while flinging spells at Irenicus, so I just Summon Hakeashar and it works its usual wonders on Irenicus' memorization library while I bash my clone. And how potent of an enemy is a human mage with no spells, no weapons, and no defenses? One of the other mages finishes my clone for me with a Lightning Bolt.. A few Magic Missiles later and Irenicus flees (like brother, like sister...cowards.) Unfortunately he slays all my allies upon leaving. He then sends in six assassins hidden in shadows, so I merely Stoneskin and cast Detect Invisibility, and they appear. I fling a Skull Trap into their midst, three die, and the rest are down in a minute. Even the Hakeashar helps me whack them, though they don't seem to have anything magical and certainly aren't spellcasters.

I leave through the northern staircase and again run into Saemon Havarian. He seems eager to help me, and transports me to the surface...finally. He invites me to stock up and then meet him at the Vulgar Monkey, then departs. I am sure he is up to no good again, but I will end up in a worse situation if I just leave through the portal in Irenicus' lab: it apparently connects directly with the Underdark. I won't be stocking up; I will be selling off. I have long run out of room to carry anything else. I want to see Brynnlaw one more time before I leave it as well.

I return to the store I had found earlier and sell off everything I can't use. When I arrive I have 132,000 gold pieces, but this increases to 161,000. I buy a two new Wands Of Lightning and a new Wand Of Frost by selling ones that are almost discharged and buying them back. I don't even bother to cast Friends...I have enough money to not worry about it. I have 137,000 afterwards. It is a quiet evening and the blueness of midnight hangs over the town, and I am glad to be alive and free of the pressures of what I must do for a while. Brynnlaw has little to offer me now financially or to challenge me, and I seem to like that. When I visit the docks, Sime has finally left, and I doubt I will ever see her again. I am waylaid by a group of pirates who want to use me as a galley slave (then why try to kill me?) but they are easy, including the mage, and when that obstacle is gone I fight four of them at once with only the Staff and still take hardly any damage. I return to the Vulgar Monkey to meet Saemon, and Lhaeozarus lightens the nameless drunken pirate in the centre of the tavern of an emerald. Expensive trinket for a drunkard to be carrying.

Saemon informs me that his ship has been scuttled (uh huh...sure, I doubt he had one) and that we can steal the Pirate Lord's ship by removing the horn that opens the sea gate from his concubine Cayia. Her home is on the east side of town. When I enter invisibly, she is with a lover and mentions she has been with Saemon, though he had said he would only woo her if he had time. Does he ever tell the truth? The horn is on her table...and a Rogue Stone. There is a nasty Disintegrate trap on the upright hutch and only a lousy Rainbow Obsidian necklace in it, but I would not dare open any unknown containers without holding the Staff, and am immune to Disintegrate when doing so. She summons three pirate guards and then leaves. With the Girdle Of Piercing and the Staff, I melee all three of them at once and lose not a single hit point of damage.

I return to the docks as instructed and meet Havarian. On boarding the ship, the Pirate Lord Desharik and several of his pirates appear. Havarian, in usual form, says that he will be below decks and tells me to attack them. Desharik kills Cayia for her infidelity, the pirates attack, but Desharik stays out of it. I don't let him. I kill them all, casting Death Fog and using the Staff and Sling. Desharik carries Studded Leather +1 and dual-wields two +1 Scimitars, but none of the rest have anything. We cast off. Saemon gives me a silver sword blade that I don't want.

Day 42
------
We are caught and boarded by another ship; the Githyanki have arrived. They are seeking the stolen Relic Of Holies. Guess what that is? The blade Saemon gave me. Guess what he says? Yes...he blames me. The Githyanki attack, but I ignore them and attack Havarian instead. He doesn't need a geas to be a complete scumbag and he has crossed me for the last time. I even cast Disintegrate on him, but he makes his save and dimension-doors elsewhere. I will kill him if I ever see him again, I promise, but doubt I ever will. The ship is boarded by another group then, and runs aground. It shatters, and I am thrown into the sea. My last thought is not for me... it is for poor Lhaeozarus...

When I come to, she is alive and well, and I am standing in front of a...something that looks like a shark that evolved into humanoid form but kept most of its...sharkiness? There are several here...I look around. There is a whole city of them here, and far overhead a transparent dome reveals I am deep beneath the ocean. I can't understand their speech until one of them casts a spell, then they speak to me. They are the Sahuagin, and I have heard of them, though I never thought they existed. The High Priestess whom I speak to thinks that I have been sent in accordance with the prophecies of their god Sekolah, the Shark-Father, to save their City-Of-Caverns. I speak to their King Ixilthetocal, who wants me to kill a Rebel Prince and return his heart. The High Priestess doesn't think that's a good idea. They are wasting away and the Drow and Illithid are making inroads. Any enemies of the Illithids are friends of mine, so I am not sure what to do. The King...well, he's the King. I'm not a revolutionary and I know nothing of their politics. But this King is certainly insane. I will have to decide. In the interim, to prove I am this "chosen of Sekolah" I battle an Ettin, a giant with two heads and a large club. The Girdle Of Bluntness is helpful again. I can't use the Sling as it is immune to piercing damage. I take it down a bit with the Staff, then cast Power Word: Stun, which is inevitably effective on magic-susceptible creatures with less than 90 current hit points. It is easy to kill when stunned; I use an Improved Haste to make sure it doesn't live for the Stun to wear off.

I dispose of some Rebels I meet in the city easily. I don't think I want to support them, as they shoot first and ask questions later. Strangely enough, the Sahuagin fight the Rebels and me too. Is no one on my side? They are poor fighters though; despite their bragging of their "conquest of the surface" which they never seem to get around to, one wimpy human mage can wipe the floor with them. I imagine they would fare rather poorly against hardened warriors. In the centre of the city, in a structure that looks like a giant shark's mouth, there is a large battle: about ten Sahuagin and Rebels, a sea Ghast, two Skeleton Warriors and two Ice Salamanders. They all fight each other, me, anyone...it's a free for all, and Elmonster is the last one standing. I use two hits of the Staff lightning/fireball to bust up the party.

Aside from the usual junk, I find something...amazing. Something that makes it worthwhile to have put up with Havarian's lies, and these fish-peoples' politics. The priestess of the group drops an item called the Cloak Of Mirroring, and what that does is reflect all spells that do damage back to their caster. I no longer need fear Beholders or Gauths, though Elder Orbs might still be tricky. It's like having permanent, never-drained Spell Turning. I can unmemorize that now.

Day 43
------
In the southern central area of the City-Of-Caverns, a Sahuagin warns me there is a trapped Drow area beyond, left behind by a Drow mage, that they dare not go into. I stomp an acid trap right away, meet up with a Bone Golem and two Ettercaps and Sword Spiders, but nothing I can't handle with the Staff and Sling. There are two Imps on a round platform, and for once Imps act as cute as they look...they want to play a "game" with me: five famous heroes appear, and I have to talk to them, and behind each one is a chest. Each gives me an item associated with another, and I to figure out who the item is for and place it in the chest behind them. For example, Elminster's item is a pipe, and Drizzt Do'Urden's is a scimitar. It would be easy but the platform is coated with nasty traps, and some have no saving throw. I simply throw up the Staff's Spell Trap and it catches the traps' spells, and it causes me to rememorize spells so don't have to rest, as I'm running short of them. When this is done, the Imps open the sixth chest, the one with no person. A Spectre emerges. The Imps tell me that it would have stolen my life force, but they are protecting me, and it dies. I wonder what would have happened if I had opened that one first. The game concluded, they dimension-door away, and I look in the chest. I find two excellent items (especially for we mages.) One is a pair of boots that makes me immune to normal weapons once per day for 30 seconds, and the second is the Cloak Of Protection +2. I can give that old tired Sewer Cloak a rest. Armour Class now -9 with it, and saving throws all go down by 1. Great!

North on the platform is a Beholder, but a nice one. Actually, it's bored. It's guarding a chest for the Drow mage who built this area. The mage is long-dead, and the Beholder has been here 60 years, with 40 to go. I talk him into letting me peek in the chest; I have to drink a Potion Of Insight to do so, as my Wisdom isn't high enough to be able to think of the right thing to make him give up the chest. When he finds there is only a tooth there, he leaves, freed of his duty. I take the tooth. I speak with the High Priestess who explains that the King is mad, and that Prince Vilynaty should be consulted as he is the Sahuagin's only hope. The tooth is the key to his base, and she gives me an Orb which will show I am there by her request. I pass back through the city. I see a few items from the battle that obtained the Cloak Of Mirroring that I had missed; one is the spell Mordenkainen's Sword I have been looking for. I read it immediately.

A pit to the south in the east side holds several undead, who look like Ghasts and Zombies but are a marine variety. The Sea Zombie Lord is magic resistant and undispellably hasted, but cannot see me with the Staff equipped. He throws several of what looks like Finger Of Death at me, but I still have the Spell Trap active. It doesn't expire so it must have been something else. A few Staff whacks and he is no more. The Sling does in the rest easily; they are slow movers. There is no treasure in the pit.

I have to fight a few more rebels in the far east of the city, but manage to meet this Prince Vilynaty, who doesn't seem much better than the King. I am still at a loss...the King is the rightful ruler and I have no right to interfere with this. However, the ultimate law of this realm is the law and prophecies of Sekolah, and what if I am the Chosen One? Perhaps if this race becomes extinct, the Drow and Illithid will annex their city and will become more aggressive, unstoppably powerful, having an untraceable route to the surface. I don't see how these fish creatures deal with the Drow anyway; one Drow warrior could easily slay a dozen of them with little injury given the easy time I am having.

Prince Vilynaty gave me a fake Sahuagin heart...or a real one that just wasn't his (there has been enough killing around here that they are rather common.) Seeing what else he might be holding, Lhaeozarus picks his pocket of a rather large item for a ferret to be hauling around: the blade of a named halberd called The Wave. I return to the King to try to talk to him about the situation, but he takes the heart immediately and then the Rebels attack. My decision has been made for me. I am forced to kill the King to save myself and Prince Vilynaty becomes the new ruler. Somehow, I don't regret this. I will have to think on this. I am rewarded with a magical rope to descend to the Underdark with, a Rod Of Lordly Might than can become a +1 sword, a +2 mace, or a +3 spear on command which of course I can't use, and some nice spells. I find Protection From The Elements and Protection From Magical Energy. I am done with this place. Before I leave, I must rest; the Underdark isn't a place to be caught tired.

Day 44
------
I dream again...this time Imoen has returned, but it isn't really her. This one is cynical and controlling. "She" shows me the Slayer form again, and how easily enemies can fall to it. When I awaken I now have an ability to replace the Bhaalspawn abilities I lost: I can become the Slayer whenever I want to. I don't want to. The "instinct" that the Bhaal/Sarevok mentioned has slipped in to replace the hole left by my lost essence. I wonder whose soul I was speaking to as Imoen in the dream.

I descend into the Underdark, a place where most humans would be frightened to death by just being there. I don't worry...I have faced many difficult situations and I am confident of my intelligence outwitting my opponents and outdoing their brute force every time. My eyes finally adjust to the dim light, and I explore the area I started out in. The first thing I find is a portal with an Air Elemental guarding it. I extract the Staff of Air from my bag. It falls in two hits...and another Air Elemental appears through the portal. They do blunt damage; I throw on the Girdle Of Bluntness and I can melee these fearsome creatures. The second and third take one hit from the Staff Of Air to die, but there seems no end to them. They need to roll a 16 or better to hit me, so I manage to dispatch about a dozen of them before the portal finally yields no more. I get nothing for this but useless experience.

To the southwest, I find some deep-dwarf traders, and sell off some items. I was able to pick up quite a bit of gold from the Sahuagin priestess as she bought items for more then she then turned around and resold them for! I just resold and rebought the Wand Of Wonder until I had over 200,000 gold pieces; although I could have millions this is enough for me. So, I don't need the money, just to get rid of a few things. I buy a couple of spells from him: Spell Sequencer, and four scrolls of Freedom. I will never be able to cast Freedom except from a one-use scroll as it is a 9th level spell, so I buy them all, especially when I hear from one of the Duergar that a mage is trapped by Imprisonment to the north of their camp. They have seen Irenicus and Bodhi.

I find another portal to the northeast, this one the same as the last but with Earth Elementals. I debate whether to just pass it by as killing them does me no good at all, but realize that there are a lot of passages out of this cavern; I may be returning and may not want to run into Earth Elementals that I had neglected before. I don't have a one-hit Earth Elemental slayer like I did with the Air ones, so I kill them all with the Sling, using the Staff just to maintain my distance. I get hit once in slaying a dozen of them, and that's only due to my impatience waiting for my attack window between Sling bullets. Unfortunately, one of the Earth Elementals wanders randomly to the Duergar trader camp and kills two of them before I can take it down. Only the one with the tale of the trapped mage survives.

Continuing my explorations, I blunder into a party of Drow to the north of the elemental portal. There are two mages, two priestesses, and two warriors. I throw the Cloak Of Non-Detection on just as they are casting True Sight and remain invisible. Drow are highly magic resistant, so I throw a Cloudkill their way to weaken them, having learned that it may be magically generated but its effects are biological. This works well...they take heavy damage. When this runs out, I first deal with the priestesses to stop them from undoing all my fine work with their healing spells. One of the mages casts Summon Nishruu...eek! It will drain my spells, wands and item abilities if it touches me. However, I remember that Death Fog will instantly kill any summoned (but not gated) creatures regardless of magic immunity or hit dice, so lure the Nishruu back to the Drow party easily as it can follow me when I am invisible, smelling the magic on me. Although the Nishruu is magic resistant to the acid fog, it still disappears instantly when I cast it. The Drow take more damage from the fog, only occasionally making their magic resistance save, and now only two remain: a mage and a warrior. I take out the warrior with one Staff blow. Now the odds are a little fairer. The mage has a Spell Turning up; I cancel it by wearing the Cloak Of Mirroring and inviting him to cast Flame Arrow at me, which rebounds several times between us until his Spell Turning is gone while mine remains. However, I then just melee him with the Staff, canceling his Stoneskins and damaging him until he falls, impervious to the low-level spells he has left.

The Drow were guarding a very strange object; a nearly spherical, faceted container, taller than a man. When I touch one facet...a trapped Sverfneblin (deep gnome) by the name of Belden Daglefodd appears. He misses his father and returns home to the northwest; I will have to investigate there. The next facet produces a lich named Alchra Diagott. He is not as pleased to see me as the young deep gnome was. I cast Summon Hakeashar, but for once a lich does exactly the right thing by immediately casting Death Spell on the Hakeashar. Of course, that is only one of the many spells it wastes during a Time Stop on the Hakeashar, so I am unharmed. Protecting myself with Spell Immunity: Necromancy, and hitting the Wand Of Monster Summoning for some ogres, the lich summons an Efreeti. Amazingly, this particular lich forgot to make himself immune to normal weapons, and the ogres damage it. The lich wastes several spells on them. I wear the Cloak Of Mirroring and reflect the Efreeti's Flamestrike back to it, Stoneskin, smash the lich down, then deal with the Efreeti. It dies without going into Gaseous Form and recovering. I won't touch any more of the facets. I see that it was probably set up so that we left-to-right reading surfacers would free the rightmost innocent gnome last and by blind luck that was my first choice; who knows what other horrors it holds.

I am getting no peace in this cavern...just to the west of the faceted orb, three Spore Colonies and a Myconid King lurk. The Spore Colonies summon many Myconids, but I am immune to their Confusion as long as I hold the Staff. When the place is full of mushroom people, I drop a Cloudkill. Like the other Confusion-tossers, the Umber Hulks, these creatures have low hit dice and poor saving throws. All of the twenty or more die instantly but two, who drop next round, and two of the Spore Colonies wilt as well. The other is easy with the Staff, and anything it summons in the interim wanders into the gas and instant death. Continuing north, I find the Svirfneblin village. I am happy to see friendly and non-threatening creatures finally. I speak with the father of the deep gnome I rescued; he gives me a pair of Bracers Of Defense AC 4. They are nice bracers, but I have better already, so I sell them back to him, along with a couple of other items.

I speak to another Svirfneblin by the name of Goldander Blackenrock in the next room, their sleeping quarters. There is a way into the Drow city that he will show me by giving me a light gem that allows me to visit someone named Adalon. She is not a Svirfneblin. He says that she is quite beautiful. In order to get the gem, I will have to rid the village of an unnatural beast that was unearthed when mining. I can only imagine that it must be some form of demon, an awful one. I could probably kill him for the gem, but he is such a small being that it would be an act of childish bullying, he may not have it on him, and I would prefer to try and do this the honourable way, but when I enter the cavern of the beast and see the tiny bodies of the Svirfneblin who challenged it, I am filled with dread.

I lay three Skull Traps around the pit to save two for later, not knowing where the monster is, and then look down it. What appears is indeed a demon: a Balor, one of the worst. Tanar'ri in appearance, it casts Paralyze. I first hit it with Lower Resistance so that my spells might get through, and then cast Mordenkainen's Sword to give me an ally that can at least damage it (the sword is a +4.) It walks over one of the Skull traps and loses 36 hit points, and is now Injured. It immediately kills my sword with a gaze, but I have made all my Paralyzation saves so I am alright for now. I stupidly trip one of my own Skull Traps and am injured, but not badly. Knowing that it works immediately on occasion, will at least cause some damage since the Balor's magic resistance has been lowered, and having three of them, I cast Chromatic Orb. It dies! Gone, and on the first try! I thank whatever force in the universe controls luck and use the scroll that the Svirfneblin gave me to bring the cave roof down, forever sealing it. My dead Mordenkainen's Sword has dropped something interesting which I identify as a Greenstone Amulet. Equivalent to the Mind Blank spell that I still haven't found, it makes one temporarily immune to all forms of mind control magic: Hold, Stun, Confusion, Chaos, Charm, Domination, Fear, and Psionics. I stash it and return to Goldander Blackenrock. He gives me...a +3 mace called Skullcrusher, which of course I can't use, and the Light Gem. I still don't know where this Adalon is, so I will explore further.

I leave the Svirfneblin village and just south of it notice there is a passage to the east, unmarked, so since Adalon is in hiding and I needed this gem to find her, I figure this must be it. I find an area with paths marked with strange spiraling symbols, which are traps. The Cloak Of Mirroring protects me from their Flamestrikes. In a dark shelf-lined chamber, a large statue of the most powerful demon there is: the ruler of the lowest plane of the Abyss: two headed, tentacle-armed Demogorgon, stands at the north end. An inscription on the statue invites an animal sacrifice to "awaken his children." Sounds evil to me...and you remember what evil means, right? Yummy magic items! So, I cast Monster Summoning close to the statue, and a Dire Wolf appears. When it walks onto the pedestal, it dies immediately and five Demon Knights appear. I only dealt with one of these in Durlag's Tower near Nashkel before Sarevok fell, and it was difficult, but I didn't have as many nice items or levels then. I have too many hit points (96, 6 over the 90 cutoff) for their Power Word: Stun spells to work, and I save against their Symbol: Stun. When their few spells are exhausted, they are, like so many other enemies, dumb sword-swingers I can keep away from with the Boots Of Speed while peppering them with endless Sling bullets. A very wise investment that Sling was. Instead of spreading the damage out, I instead concentrate on one if possible until it falls...a creature with 1 hit point left can still damage as much as if it was uninjured. I have several Stoneskins left in case they get a hit on me while I run off, and using the sling gives them a large bonus...when one of them hits a Stoneskin the modifier to his hit is +14! How can this be? It got +4 for me holding a ranged weapon...but that doesn't account for 10 more. It must have a very powerful weapon and be very strong too.

I find out when they are all dead, a long time later, and not losing a single hit point. My patience is nearly limitless; I suffered through that first critical battle with just dwarven Mencar Pebblecrusher in the Promenade five or more times longer than it took to kill all five Demon Knights, a testament to how far I have improved through experience and the items I have acquired. The strong one drops a +4 two-handed sword, some very potent armour, and a girdle: The Girdle Of Frost Giant Strength, which makes my Strength 21, the same as a Frost Giant! This is another of the components for the superweapon Crom Faeyr, and I haven't been able to bring myself to sell the Hammer Of Thunderbolts yet. I will wear this belt of course, as the completed hammer would consume the Girdle and be useless to me.

Leaving the chamber I retrace my steps back and continue exploring. There are a party of Drow here guarding the gate out...I ignore them for now. North I find an enemy I can't ignore: the Kuo-Toa. They can all, every one of them, see me when the Staff's invisibility is active. They are also just about the most annoying enemies I have yet encountered; I've had about enough of fish people already from having recently been involved with the Sahuagin whom they superficially resemble, they make an annoying mechanical noise when struck, and I can't run away from most of them to use the Sling as they are naturally very fast without hasting. They aren't difficult melee opponents and their mages know only simple spells that I am immune to or reflect back to them. Had I not the Staff and other magical protections, I would find myself getting stunned often as their crossbow bolts stun enemies on a saving throw failure. When they are dead, I find that the chamber is lined with fish tanks, and I can take some "corrupted tadpoles" from them. I don't really know what to do with them, but if they are available, they will probably be important.

I soon find out; there is another set of Kuo-Toa chambers here with far more of them. I hit the Wand Of Monster Summoning to give them something else to worry about, and then concentrate on taking out the crossbow archers with the Staff, wearing the Cloak Of Reflection so the mage's spells reflect back to them. When I have only a few remaining and the mages are dead, I draw them into the chamber of the "Prince" of the Kuo-Toa, who looks very blurry compared to the rest. There are more fish tanks lining the walls here: they contain healthy tadpoles. By dumping the corrupted ones I found into them, the healthy ones are ruined, and the Prince changes appearance to match the rest of them. I cast Sunfire which kills two of the pursuers outright and weakens the rest, then Stoneskin and turn the Staff and my newly-found 21 Strength on them...they don't last long. The Prince carries about 4,700 gold pieces and too many gems to put in my Gem Bag, so I just carry them loose. I certainly don't need the money. He also drops some of his blood; I keep it as most of the weird items I find turn out to be essential. This has been another very busy day I see, as it draws to a close. I am not tired yet.

Day 45
------
Returning to where I entered, I find a chamber with a full Beholder and two Gauth. They are easy...with the new Cloak Of Mirroring. I cast Agannazar's on the Beholder to weaken it as they can sometimes throw deadlies such as Maze or Imprisonment (from the Elder Orbs) that are non-reflecting. All three damage or kill themselves, requiring only two Staff hits on a Gauth when they are done. The Beholder has petrified itself; I hope it wasn't holding anything important. Still no Adalon...this is not the area. I will have to explore another exit from the main chamber that I first descended to.

I return to the little Svirfneblins and sell off some items and gems. The Armour Of The Hart, two-handed Soul Reaver +4 blade and Skullcrusher +3 mace fetch a good coin. I also sell the Greenstone Amulet and then buy it back again...now instead of just the one charge, it has increased to 50 charges and is now a useful item. If I have any trouble with mind control magic I shall put it to good use, though I am loathe to remove that Amulet Of Power for any reason whatsoever. I return to the cavern and continue my search for Adalon. Just north of the Earth Elemental portal, I discover one I had missed: Fire Elementals. So, I fell all dozen of them or so with the Sling again. There is still no reward.

I push further to the east, and run into more of those stupid, ugly and bloody annoying Kuo-Toa fish people. If there is a race I have met so far that I feel any sort of raw hatred for, this is it. Even the dragons were less trouble. The Cloak Of Non-Detection does not stop their endless innate True Sights, they are about 80-90% resistant to magical damage, and I can't shake them no matter how far I run. I Cloudkill them and run a few times around the perimeter...they take full damage from that. I run a long way away to split them up and three Monitors follow me very closely. I use the Wand Of Monster Summoning to give them something else to keep them busy. I end up casting Disintegrate on one as I am so frustrated, and it does the trick. Once I have separated another one out I can melee them one at a time. When the two Monitors are dead, I melee the remainder of the crossbow archers, then return and finish off the wizard...the rest fell to the Cloudkill. I am glad I polluted their spawning grounds and killed their Prince; I would wipe their entire filthy species out without a second thought if I had the opportunity.

I find a passage the southeast that points in that direction, so take that...then I wish I hadn't. There is certainly nothing or no one beautiful in this...I recognize the round room and garish alien colouration I had seen from the Athkatla sewers...I have just blundered into an Illithid lair. Three of them appear and knock me unconscious (saving throws be damned) and I am taken to a cell. An ogre appears and explains what is going on; he is the jailor and this is an Underdark version of the Copper Coronet's barbaric gladiatorial matches before I showed up and put an end to them. I am then forced to fight for the Illithids' amusement in an arena. My first opponents (not fair odds) are three Umber Hulks. I waste another Cloudkill on them just to get them out of the way. When I am returned to the cell I am given five Potions Of Extra Healing, which is good as I had to use two when I dealt with the Kuo-Toa, the first in a long time.

The door which was locked before to the north can now be opened. I do, and there are five Githyanki here...the same five who attacked my ship before for the blade that Havarian stole. Their leader is Simyaz. I speak with him, but he doesn't even ask for the blade back, though I don't even want it and would give it back if asked...It's not useful to me, it's not mine and its owners are still alive. They have to fight for the Illithids' amusement as well. When they return, there are only four. Simyaz explains that we are next to face each other. He has a plan, though: he and the other Githyanki can disrupt the mental powers of the Illithids long enough for me to escape and find a way out of here. I agree as it seems as if our situation is hopeless otherwise, and as barbaric as the Githyanki are, they are certainly preferable to the Illithid...the enemy of my enemy may be a friend.

We are taken to the arena...guess what? Annoying fish people again. There is quite the supply of them just outside so the Illithid have no doubt put that to good use. I cast Fireshield and happily bash away while the Githyanki demonstrate that they aren't just pretty faces...or barbaric. I gain a new respect for them from their abilities to disrupt psionics magically. When the Kuo-Toa are dead, I leave through the east door and take on the Ogre jailor. With the Girdle Of Bluntness on, he is a pushover, though he has about 200 hit points and takes a long time to go down. He can only damage me on critical hits. In a hollow table here, I find the hilt of a longsword which might be possible to reforge, as if that will help me.

To the southeast, an empty room except for a couple of Illithids, and with my invisibility and negative Save Vs. Spells they can't damage me at all. Further east a truly strange sight meets my eyes: about a dozen humans lying on beds in another circular room, stunned. Their mental energies appear to be being tapped, possibly to feed the "Master Brain" that I heard from the Githyanki lies somewhere in this hellhole. Alien devices here seem to be able to accept a kind of liquid; I will have to find that. Returning to where the Ogre's body now lies, I find another hallway to the east. I am invisible, so the Illithid that guards another circular room with six vats of liquid doesn't notice me take some and leave. I return to the humans, add some of this liquid to one of the devices, and they awaken from their trance. They were indeed captured while in the Underdark and used as brain-energy sources by the Illithid. They will wait until I find a way out. There is a large silvery machine here, and waking the humans has activated it. I am able to make four "control circlets" with it before it runs out of them. It appears that putting them on a creature will dominate them. Interesting...the illithid are almost totally magic resistant, and if these circlets will dominate them with no save possibility, they would probably dominate anything.

I return again to where the Ogre's body lies, and another hallway is open to the north. There are two locked doors here that I would have to Knock open, but I don't want to, as I can see they only lead to small cells; probably more Kuo-Toa. If I don't find something better to have to open, I will try them later. I go north, and find a bard's harp in a recessed hollow in the north wall of this room. Such a strange and out-of-place item to find here; bards are such dreamlike beings of light and song and happiness, and this hellish pain pit is just about the last place I would expect to find one. I suddenly miss light and song and happiness, having had so little of it in this life of death-dealing and sinister enemies, and regret leaving Ha'er-Dalis behind...no matter what my accomplishments, I feel empty inside sometimes. I hope the Primes are treating him well and learning as I have that a creature is who, and not what, he is.

Both doors of this room are locked, and can only be opened by Illithids. I return to the Illithid I ignored earlier, who guarded the fluid that woke the humans, and use one of the Control Circlets on it. It is charmed and will follow me. Leading it back to the two locked doors, they spring open when it approaches, and the Githyanki dimension-door in. They are leaving without me, despite all my efforts, and my respect for them falls back to its previous level. I take out the Illithid with the Staff as it has gone hostile again. To the east, the doorway out. I could just leave...but I won't until I wipe this place out. To the west, several Illithid and Umber Hulks. I'm becoming rather singleminded in my use of Cloudkill and all the Umber Hulks are but a memory seconds later. I hide out in invisibility while the Illithids are damaged, suppressing a laugh as they try to heal themselves but are magic-resistant to their own curative spells. The Cloudkill disperses and I bash them to death with the Staff. I notice that one of my successful saves is a 0: their Psionic Blasts DO have a save penalty. Eeesh...I was so close to death so many times and never knew it. Soon they are dead, and I find yet more to the north. There are eight vats here: seven along the walls and a central one. From each I can make a Brine Potion that confers temporary immunity to Psionics, but I am permanently immune to them already so don't require them. There is nothing else here but the three fresh Illithid corpses.

Continuing to the west, I find a doorway that leads to the arena, the "privileged" seat of the Illithid who watched the contests. Further west, yet another pack of Illithid and Umber Hulks, yet another Cloudkill. I notice that even when invisible, the Illithid can still target me with Psionic Blasts, but only when they take Cloudkill damage...and then I understand why: they are able to psychically determine who is causing the damage to them and seek me out. There is a secret door here, and another door that requires a living Illithid to open it. Unfortunately I killed them all, but I am sure I will find others, which I do to the north three more and an Umber Hulk. I don't use a Cloudkill this time but do them in with the Staff, then remember that I needed one to open the other door. Must have been that I had five Intelligence points drained away for a few rounds...oops. In one of the tables here, I find a quarterstaff which I will identify later.

I return and find that the locked door has already opened...I travel north and find the object I was seeking: The Master Brain. It stuns me as soon as I open the door, but no other enemies are in view and I am invisible, and recover quickly. Not wanting to risk this again, I decide to use the Greenstone Amulet. Each charge will last only one turn, or six rounds, but it is better than being stunned again. Inside, there are two Illithids and an Umber Hulk in addition to the Master Brain. I am invisible; I use a charge on the Amulet and whack the Brain. It summons three Brain Golems to defend itself. They can't see me either, but I am terrified of getting stunned while visible. So, I clump the enemies and cast Greater Malison and Symbol: Stun, which I don't expect to stun the Illithid or Golems but instead to stun the Master Brain, with a bonus of stunning the Umber Hulk as well, with Greater Malison the save penalty is -8. This works, so I can now kill the Master Brain popping into invisibility after each strike. It is not magic resistant at all, either.

When it dies, a psychic backlash goes through my mind and I know that all the doors have now been unlocked. I deal first with the Umber Hulk, then the Golems and Illithid. I have such a low Armour Class with the Girdle Of Bluntness (and Illithids, Golems and Umber Hulks all do blunt damage) that I can melee two Brain Golems and two Illithid, and the danger is not damage, but Illithid Intelligence drain. Only Illithid critical hits get through. Unfortunately, one gets two in a row, which...uh, drops my Intilluh...uh...Smarts to 9, which is...like, bad. So i like, uh...stand around a while, ok? And i, uh...get bored, but they like cant see me, ya know? Which is like good. And when my Intelligence returns again to 19, I am free to melee the Illithid again, though I am a bit more careful to become invisible immediately if any more critical hits are encountered. I check my spellbook carefully to make sure they are all still there as well. When all enemies are dead, I check what the Brain dropped: a King's Tears, two Emeralds, three Diamonds, fifty-three Shandon gems, several hundred gold pieces...and more blood. I now have an Elder Brain and Kuo-Toa Prince blood sample. (Will I be opening a clinic?) Strange, but of course I will keep them both.

Leaving the Brain's chamber, I find another hallway south, and three strange-looking containers. When I open the first, an Insane Dwarf Warrior is inside. I don't want to melee him, so I use the Sling, and he uses his sling. My Sling is a little better than his and he dies easily. He drops a Ring Of Fire Control that gives 50% fire resistance, charms Fire Elementals, and casts Flamestrike and Burning Hands daily. I consider that I can now sell the other one...I doubt I will meet any more Red Dragons...until I check more carefully: the previous Ring increases fire resistance by 40%, this one SETS fire resistance to 50%. I will keep both. The next container holds an Umber Hulk; I handily melee it with the Staff and Girdle Of Bluntness. The last holds a Kuo-Toa priest, and the Cloak Of Mirroring reflects its Flamestrike and Unholy Blight right back on itself while I Staff it down. The Illithid lair is no more.

I meet with the former slaves at the exit, their leader thanks me, and my reputation unfortunately increases again. They depart as free men, and I follow soon after. I notice another passage out of the main cavern just south of the one I arrived from. Perhaps I can find Adalon in there. First, I need to rest...I am out of spells and I want to sell off a few things; the Svirfneblin can provide both. I would never wander through the Underdark in any condition but invisible; in this state I encounter Simyaz and his Githyanki while on my way back to the village. I ignore him; I know what he is waiting there for. I will try and give him the blade, and his barbaric rituals will demand my head as he refuses to believe my innocence in the matter, though a mage has no use at all for a two-handed sword of any potency. I sell off gems and other items, take the best room in the place (I earned it,) and sleep soundly, oddly comforted by the fact I am hours' walking distance straight down, beneath the surface of Toril.

Day 46
------
I return to the passage near the Illithid lair, and enter. Nope, nothing beautiful here either, unless one has an eye for Beholders...and they certainly have eyes for me. The Cloak Of Mirroring goes on. There is an Elder Orb and Beholder here, right at the front door. For some reason, none of my spells work here so I can't cast Spell Immunity: Abjuration and waste both Spell Immunities trying. This day is not starting out well. When the Elder Orb charges me I know it will try and cast Imprisonment, so I keep away from it, and run right into a party of five Drow warriors fighting another Beholder. It manages to petrify one before they bring it down. Since I am invisible to all but the Elder Orb following me, they then turn on it, and it doesn't attack them as it is concentrating on me, and can't reach me since they have blocked the passage. They kill it for me. Whew! It drops an Amulet Of Spell Warding, a sword blade probably for the hilt I picked up in the Illithid lair, and its own eyeball.

Now to deal with the Drow...and it's right back to Mencar Pebblecrusher in the Promenade again. Their armour is phenomenal, and some carry shields. Even with invisibility it takes a long time to even bring one down. When I have done so, I work out some stats while safely invisible...I had to roll a 17 to hit this particular one. My sling added 5 to my hit rolls; my THAC0 is 6 with it. Therefore they have a -11 Armour Class. I retrieve one set of their armour: it is Adamantine Full Plate +5, Armour Class -4. Unbelievable! I have never seen armour like this...and they are all wearing it. Their shields are +3. Their weapons are all +3. With -4 armour and a +3 shield for another -4, they must have a Dexterity of 17. Elves and variations can have up to 19 Dexterity...I am glad they don't or I'd be only hitting them on 18's, 19's and 20's. I have some tough battles ahead if I will be going up against these buggers, invisible or not. And they are all magic resistant too. I have only one Lower Resistance spell. I hope none of them can ever see me. When only one Drow warrior is left, I throw on the Girdle Of Bluntness, which nicely undoes his +4 To Hit Bonus as he is using a flail (+3 flail, so his Strength must be 15) and melee him successfully. I take heart...I can still compete with fair odds. I don't like this as much as I expected though...here we are, two humanoids so closely related as to be indistinguishable except by colour by many more alien species, and we are battling it out in a lair of Beholders. We should be working together to defeat the Beholders, not each other. But I reconsider...the Drow always wanted it this way. It's Drow vs. everyone and everything else, and damn all that get in their way, and any Drow who expresses the sentiments that I just thought gets killed very quickly by their own people for being weak and sentimental. So I finish the job. Perhaps someday this will change, but not in the foreseeable future.

I feel even better after defeating three Beholders and three Gauths near there. I throw a Skull Trap into the clump to soften them up and let their own spells do the rest with the Cloak Of Mirroring, fearing Maze or Imprisonment and having only Spell Trap to deal with it, and that would disappear in seconds from the incessant pounding. The only damage I take is 3 hit points from getting nibbled by an angry Gauth. One of the Beholders petrifies itself as well. Further south, Illithid and Gauth do battle...there are about four of each, I just toss a Cloudkill in the mix to see what falls out. A couple of the Illithid lose morale and emerge, only to be rudely introduced to Mr. Staff. I get stunned when the Cloudkill has dissipated, but for the third time in a row I am invisible. When it wears off, the remaining take one Staff blow apiece to go down.

In the southeast of the lair...I can't believe what I run into...six full Beholders, about six Gauths, and an Elder Orb. I could be in real trouble from the Orb. Luckily it is in the back of the pack and can't get further being blocked by the rest, but it will cast Imprisonment on me as a last resort if I let it. I throw everything at them...two hits of the Staff's lightning/fireball ability, Cloudkill, and hit the Elder Orb with the Fire Wand. Every spell fails if I try to cast anything, even zero-casting-time spells like Magic Missile. I keep having to re-equip the Staff as their Anti-Magic Ray even dispels the Protection From Evil it provides. The Orb falls. Ahhhhh......close call. Fully three of them have petrified themselves this time. 

Without the Cloak Of Mirroring? I might as well have packed up and gone home. I would have taken weeks to do this even memorizing nothing but Spell Turnings...and living through it. I smack the Gauths with the Staff and keep searching. I finally find what they were guarding in a hidden cache in the northernmost chamber: 5,600 gold pieces, 5 Emeralds, 3 King's Tears gems, and a couple of other lesser valuables. I hope that there is something to all of this other than money...however I search the lair quite thoroughly and aside from the location I just described, and a much more obvious cache in an east central location containing a few minor valuables, there is nothing. There aren't even any Beholders, so it's time to leave. Perhaps my search was hampered by wanting out of this place; being here is like walking through a monster's bowels. I sell off the jewels to the Svirfneblin.

I then remember the tale the dwarf told me...the trapped mage. Surely I would not want to be in a similar situation. He had mentioned this took place just north of the Duergar encampment. Having nothing else to do except to continue to find Adalon, I will see whether this furthers it. Near the Earth Elemental portal, I read a scroll of Freedom, and indeed a mage does appear. His name is Vithal, and he isn't sure who imprisoned him or why, though doubtless it was a Drow who didn't need a reason and probably had a good laugh about it afterwards. Vithal was in the midst of actually entering the three portals that all the Elementals had come out of when he was imprisoned, searching for magical treasures left by yet another mage. He needs his spellbook to continue, and it was scavenged by the Svirfneblin when he was imprisoned, so I return to their village and buy it from one of them for 300 gold pieces. When I return, he is ready. He will enter the portals and probably attract one of their guardians, who won't be pleased.

Since I have to defend someone, I don't have the luxuries of invisibility, distance or time. I drink an Oil Of Speed, remove my Boots Of Speed as they tend to mess up my number of attacks per round and the Oil is doing what they do, Stoneskin, don the Girdle Of Frost Giant Strength and wield the Staff Of Rynn for maximum damage. I make sure I am between the portal and Vithal so he isn't killed immediately by what emerges. A Greater Earth Elemental is what does, but because of my preparations, Vithal is saved and I don't take a bit of damage in felling it, doing 15-20 points of damage per strike twice per round, and plenty of Stoneskins left over afterwards. He disappears into the portal and emerges a short time later. We then do the same at the Fire portal, with a Greater Fire Elemental emerging. It damages me very slightly as the fire components of its attacks go right through the Stoneskins, though I am unharmed by the much greater physical damage. My Stoneskins are still present. At the Air portal, I use the Staff Of Air and the Greater Air Elemental fails its save on the second hit. All three portals done, Vithal gives me a magical rod and prepares to leave. I ask him to increase the reward a tiny bit, and he adds on scrolls of Simulacrum and Abi Dalzim's Horrid Wilting. I haven't the latter yet; this is good. I am satisfied, and Vithal teleports out of this awful place. I could have pressed the issue further, but I wouldn't want him to fight me considering the effort I just underwent to save his life. Oops...I should have asked Lhaeozarus to pick his pocket first. Ah well, live and learn.

Finally, I find an almost hidden pathway to the north, just to the west of the wooden bridge where all the Kuo-Toa were...this is new. I progress north to another bridge. Crossing it, a Drow war party dimension-doors in, but they don't see me; as was mentioned before I am always invisible when I explore. Not wanting to take hours to do them in, I Cloudkill them, relax while they take heavy damage, and then turn the Staff first on the priestess. Again I am able to melee one of their warriors with the Girdle Of Bluntness though he is uninjured. Since the odds are fair, he loses morale and runs away...typical. I can then finish the job with the Frost Giant Strength girdle and Staff Of Rynn adding 8 to all my attack rolls and 11 to my damage.

The path to the north forks, the eastern path leading to the closed gates of the Drow outpost of Ust Natha. I am able to enter a cavern to the western path...I have finally found Adalon, and as soon as I see her I put on the Ring Of Human Influence, because when one meets anything as rare and beautiful as a Silver Dragon, one wants to make the best first impression possible. Finally, I noble I want to meet...I could fall in love with her if she were in humanoid form as dragons can appear. I speak with her and she is friendly enough, but only once breaks from this to command silence from me, and then I understand why as she is clearly shaken afterwards and appears to regret her outburst...her eggs have been stolen, by no less than Irenicus. He stole them to curry favour with the Drow and they now hold them. If she leaves to retrieve them, they will be destroyed. I tell her I will help her regardless of reward...and she changes me...changes me into a Drow, no less. When I peer at my reflection in the pools that line her lair, I am indistinguishable from the Drow I have seen. It is the only way I can enter Ust Natha without being immediately attacked. Though I know my invisibility is unbreakable by the Drow, this is still a matter for subtlety, not brute force. They will destroy Adalon's eggs if they think I am there to retrieve them, and invisibility won't save them.

I depart and this time take the eastern fork in the road to Ust Natha. A Drow guard sees me and flees through the gates...am I doomed already? Will he sound the alarm? Perhaps he was just announcing my approach. I remember my persona: I am Veldrin of Ched Nasad, sent to assist while Ust Natha is shorthanded with most of its warriors, mages and clerics fighting the surface elves. While in the city, I must remember never to show weakness, sentiment or fear lest I be suspected. I will have to control the urge to scratch constantly as well; this new appearance is itchy and a little uncomfortable as if it were clothing rather than illusion, so I twitch on occasion, and hesitate when walking. I must always listen and obey to anything a female Drow tells me, as they are fiercely matriarchal, with a Matron Mother of the dominant House (family clan) controlling the city. All the clerics of the spider god Lolth are female...what better symbol of a malignant matriarchy than the spider, whose females are several times the size of the males and devour them after mating?

I approach the gates...they open, and a Drow dimension-doors in. He questions me...I could say I am the humble Veldrin from Ched Nasad who begs entry, but that wouldn't be very smart. I simply say I am Veldrin from Ched Nasad, and I am allowed entry as I was expected (because Adalon killed a party led by the Veldrin whose name I bear, and she knew their plans.) I should meet with a Solaufein of the Male Fighters' Society immediately as I am expected there. He is "only" a male, but being in such a position he must carry the favour and protection of a ranking female of a dominant house...I will do so.

When I enter, I am in sort of a promenade. The Drow decor is bleak, but interesting. The symbol of Lolth is everywhere; radial legs around a central body emblazoned on every possible flat surface. There are several Drow merchants here, and even two Githyanki for some reason. I immediately am witness to the brutality the Drow can deliver: an unarmed Duergar slave is attacked by his armed master and murdered in cold blood. But even here, there is justice. A priestess arrives and is furious that he took it upon himself to kill one of her slaves...and Disintegrates him. She is his mother; there is no sentiment among these people. I sell off a few items to them, including the Adamantine armour and weapons...they are not valuable considering their potency as they are so common here. I identify the rod Vithal gave me: it is a Rod Of Absorption and will absorb nine levels of any spell per charge, a great complement to the Spell Trap of the Staff. It has just one charge, so I sell it to a Drow merchant and buy it back. Finally, I decide to check with them to see what they all have for sale. It is a treasure trove, and I buy many items: a +3 quarterstaff called the Rod Of Smiting made for destroying golems. They must Save Vs. Spell or be slain. A Staff Of Earth like the Staff Of Air; Earth Elementals are slain if they don't Save Vs. Spells. A +3 throwing dagger that returns to the thrower and does fire damage with every hit...I can sell those Sunstone bullets taking up room in my inventory and never worry about Trolls again. The spell scrolls Conjure Earth Elemental, Conjure Fire Elemental, Ruby Ray Of Reversal (one of the few that will get rid of a Spell Trap) and Finger Of Death. I read them all successfully and then hurry over to see Solaufein, making sure I am wearing the Ring Of Human Influence whenever I talk to anyone to be as believable as possible.

I speak to him in front of the Male Fighter's Society. I don't expect a good reaction and I don't get one, but he is tolerable, and he seems angry about something other than my presence. He asks for my name, and I tell him it obviously doesn't matter given his reaction; he actually enjoys the jest...something is different about this Drow and I am glad it is he I have to deal with. He tells me to meet one of the Handmaidens at the entrance to the city...I won't be stopping to shop this time. I return to the entrance and meet Solaufein and Imrae there. A Handmaiden has been captured by Illithid (whom I correctly identify from the Drow name 'devourers', which builds more much-needed respect from them) and they will be bringing her to the lair I just finished cleaning out. I am to meet Solaufein there in less then twelve hours, and he will intercept the Illithids' astral travel. I won't wait the twelve hours...too risky. Instead I go immediately.

On the way to meet Solaufein, I am attacked by a party of adventurers, probably evil though they fight me as I appear Drow (as I find several yummy magic items on them.) Their thief has a high Detect Illusion but the Cloak Of Non-Detection stops that. I throw a few Wand Of Lightning discharges at them, two Skull Traps, and all of them die but two. I take them down with the Staff. I won't be able to use area-effect spells when helping Solaufein, so might as well use them here. Invisibly, I see Solaufein ahead. As I cannot use Cloudkill nor go invisible on the Illithids when they arrive, I drink a Potion Of Speed (I found one on the bodies of the dead party, so no loss,) Stoneskin, wear the Girdle Of Frost Giant Strength, and wisely drink a Potion Of Genius to counteract their Intelligence drain. My intelligence hits 23, so I am positively displaced from my median state of neural function during the current temporal region. I converse with the luminescence-absorbing nether elf whose moniker is Solaufein (I must try to maintain my composure through the effect of this potion...ahem) and test my waters. I tell him I am sorry for his punishment; he comes out with the standard Drow reply of this being a sign of weakness, but changes his mind, albeit warily. He hesitatingly thanks me for my concern; I have made a friend amongst a friendless people. I will trust Solaufein from now on...he is clearly the spark of hope for the Drow that I expressed before. It may be stupid or naive to believe so, but if a hero like Drizzt Do'Urden can arise from them, then perhaps Solaufein and many other Drow have the same potential.

Solaufein performs his casting, and they arrive: the kidnapped Handmaiden Phaere, three Illithid, and three Umber Hulks. We plow into them with earnest. Solaufein is a brave and powerful fighter who is truly helpful, far more so than anyone else who has pretended to assist me yet done nothing. Phaere casts several spells which even injure the Illithid. They drain my Intelligence twice right through my Stoneskin to 13, but this is certainly higher than zero. When our enemies have been vanquished, Phaere insists on returning herself, and leaves. I could have been angry with her, but showing this is not a sign of Drowness. When she is gone, I find out why Solaufein seemed irritated; he is clearly tired of serving her. He asks me to meet him back in Ust Natha's tavern, which I will do. When I arrive, I find I have a few days in which to rest before being given another task. I am an outsider, so don't wish to wander randomly as I will have too many opportunities to put my foot in my mouth...it is clear however that Phaere not only treats Solaufein poorly through custom, but actually enjoys it.

I wander through the bar, but listen without speaking. However one area makes me curious...a locked pit on the east end of the place. I speak to Szordrin, who stands just before it, and he tells me it is a fighting pit, where monsters are challenged. I have had enough of challenges, but I know I will be more respected if I can perform there...this is a standard test of Drow maleness, so I accept. I am still Stoneskinned. My first opponent is an Umber Hulk, easy with the Staff and Girdle Of Bluntness, for a reward of 250 gold pieces. My second is anything but easy, but I make it so: a Nabassu Tanar'ri that casts Death Gaze. I cast Lower Resistance and throw a Skull Trap at it, and it's Nearly Dead already. Magic Missile is all it takes to do it in, for 500 gold pieces. Next, a Sahuagin Prince (could it be Vilynaty?) He drains my Stoneskins and is a tough melee opponent, so I throw up a Fireshield to make him suffer for all the damage he causes me. It works well; the Fireshield does him in by a maximal amount on his last hit and his body is charred. Barbecued fish...my belly rumbles, but eating a felled opponent would not appear honorable. I collect my 750 gold pieces. The last, and most difficult for most, is one that has even cost several Drow warriors their lives: a Beholder. I don the Cloak Of Mirroring, hit it with Agannazar's before it can mess with my spellcasting, let it petrify itself, then bust it into bits with the Staff and collect my 1000 gold pieces. There are no more opponents. I get to ask a few questions to Szordrin, but he doesn't know what the Drow are up to. They are massing to either fight the surface elves or the 'devourer' Illithid. I hope it's the latter.

Across the bar is another fighting pit, but this one is Drow-versus-Drow. I disdain this kind of barbarism, even among willing participants, so decline. I find a stairway near this pit and ascend. There are a couple of bedrooms here. Curious as to what this place is other than just the bar's inn, I speak with an attractive Drow female and she makes me an, ahem...offer, given that I have proven my prowess as a virulent male, and I even did so without having to resort to killing other Drow. I am tempted; as I stated before, the pleasures of this life are few and far between. I am not even a drinking man as I need to preserve my mind above all other concerns. Besides, one will never know until one tries, and I trust that Adalon's disguise was complete...in all areas. This is no enslaved prostitute forced against her will to sell herself; there is no coercion here, just desire and sensuality. I just hope she's not a big enough follower of Lolth that she tries to kill and devour me afterwards.

So I partake of her dark and willing flesh, and she of mine, and we are not disappointed.

Day 47
------
Pleasures being few and far between, I return to task on awakening. I meet Solaufein and Phaere again at the entrance to Ust Natha; this time I need not speak to Phaere through Solaufein, but can address her directly. Our next assignment is to deal with a Beholder that has been smuggling Adamantine in the southeast of the city. I meet them there, and make short work of it with the Cloak Of Mirroring. Phaere tells Solaufein that some acolytes will be inspecting the corpse (though it was shattered after being petrified) so to leave it alone. I don't know what has transpired before this between the two of them, but Solaufein becomes very angry at this; he sounds as though he thinks he is being betrayed. When I next meet them at the bar, the next task is rather distasteful. The Svirfneblin have not been giving proper tribute, and Phaere wants us to massacre a patrol and bring the leader's helmet back as proof. Solaufein, as I expected, manages to become angry with this task though draws no suspicion by attaching a nicely Drow meaning to it: gnomes are not worthy opponents for a warrior. I know his true meaning, but say nothing. We have several days to complete this...no hurry.

I don't wait around, though, leaving Ust Natha and returning to the Svirfneblin's village. I encounter Solaufein south of there, and tell him that I will take care of this dirty task for him. Happy to be relieved of it, he returns to Ust Natha. When I go north and approach the bridge to the Svirfneblin's village, the patrol leader greets me, in a friendly manner even though I appear Drow. I feel very bad for these little folk who are kind and trusting in the face of the dark hatred that brews in the Underdark. I ask him for his helmet...of course, he would like to know why I need it, so I tell him the truth: I was sent to kill them, but I won't, and I need it as proof. Why, he wonders. Again I am honest: the Drow feel that the Svirfneblin are not showing enough fear and/or respect to them. He is very happy that I have explained this and parts with his helmet; his comment that "...we will be telling deep lords that much bowing and scraping to the dark ones is to be done, if war to be avoided is" almost causes me to laugh out loud, such is my relief at not having to senselessly murder these tiny innocent people. If only I could explain to the Drow that sometimes asking properly can get as much done as killing, and not cause one's people to be universally despised.

When I return the helmet to Phaere, Solaufein cannot contain his anger anymore. "I save my wrath for the Drow's true enemies..." he says, which finally seals into place that his feelings are true to mine. He even insults Phaere; as leader of the Male Fighter's Guild, there would certainly be consequences to his punishment, and he may be the male in Ust Natha with the greatest right to do so, but it still may not be enough. Phaere wants me to meet her in her quarters in one hour. I go quickly, though I dread any of Phaere's "tasks". My dread has basis...she wants Solaufein dead and his Piwafwi Cloak to prove it. As her lackey, I probably will take his place as he doesn't seem to like the position anymore. He is in the Male Fighter's Society. I have three days.

I don't need three days. I meet Solaufein there, and having tested the waters, I plunge in...I tell him the truth, all of it. I have been sent to kill him and there is no way I will do so...and I even invite him to leave with me if he would like to; he is the first person I have met that I would willingly travel with, and a Drow of all people...as I have said, a person is who and not what they are, a lesson lost on many, and Solaufein is as true and honourable and brave as any human could be, and far quieter, introspective, more intelligent and less annoying than many I have met. Only a surfacer could be this merciful to him, and now that this is now longer a secret I give my friend my real name, and my mission. I know he will never betray me. We have fought the true enemy as human and Drow together and such shared loss of blood goes further than any manufactured hatred built by those who seek power on the corpses of their underlings. He knows that leaving with me would endanger both of us, but he does not depart me before giving me a secret of his own in return for mine, one that seems minor but would as quickly end his life among the Drow as mine would: he does not worship Lolth, he doesn't even like her. His goddess is Eilistraee, Lady Silverhair, the only non-Chaotic Evil deity in the Drow pantheon...and the goddess of just those things I missed: music, dancing and beauty. He will stay in Ust Natha but out of sight, until this is over. I turn away to allow my friend to make his escape in peace, and also to not let him see I am near tears.

His Piwafwi cloak, as with all other Drow goods, is superior to anything I have ever encountered. It adds 75% to both of the wearer's stealth abilities and gives +6 to breath weapon saving throws...and it will crumble to dust in sunlight. I return it to Phaere, and get another...offer. This one I decline at any cost. I tell her I am already collared by a Handmaiden in Ched Nasad, and whether by myself or my Ring Of Human Influence, she believes me. Miffed but too overwhelmed by her earnest to let it affect her, she tells me to meet herself and Matron Mother Ardulace at the Temple of Lolth. There I am introduced and given another task, one of three and I may choose among any of the them as befits me as all these required items are of equivalent power and value. Little do they know I have already completed all three of them: they require either an Elder Orb eye, Kuo-Toa Prince's blood, or the blood of an Illithid Elder Brain. Nothing else could establish me as a respected male of power more than presenting all three of these items that I had no idea what to do with to the Matron Mother at once. They are overjoyed, and for a short time a disguised human has become the most respected Drow in the place where the Drow came to exist.

Phaere asks me to yet again meet her back at her quarters, and gives me one hour to arrive. On my way back, I meet a Drow mage named Visaj. He has a magical rope for sale, and he says it used to belong to the Drow mercenary Jarlaxle, and can be used to enter the house of Deirex, the founder of Ust Natha who transformed himself into a lich (somehow this is fitting) and resides in the mage tower. I buy the rope for 1,000 gold as it is indeed magical and if it is a fake, then I haven't lost enough money to matter. When I am almost in the Female Fighter's Society, another Drow female, a Matron by the name of Taso Kala, dimension-doors in. She tells me in no uncertain terms to go forth and destroy a sect of Ghaunadaur worshippers in the southeast of the city (the same area the Beholder was in...they should just close that area off and save the trouble.) When I arrive, there are two priests of Ghaunaduar, two Othyughs, and about a dozen slimes, oozes and things, including a couple of Mustard Jellies; Ghaunaduar is the god of slimes and oozes, just in case they find they need one. Clumping them, I Cloudkill the clump to weaken the priests and Otyughs. I need something to work on those Jellies though...something that strikes as a magical weapon, and it would be nice if it was immune to most damage as well. Is there such a thing? Mordenkainen's Sword. It makes short work of both weakened Otyughs, both priests, and acts as a target for all the flying slime while carving up the Jellies. It is immune to all the damage of all the enemies, though it is slowed by the Jellies' slime and Otyugh's tentacles. I Stoneskin and am able to finish the Jellies with the Staff while it distracts them, then the rest of the slimes are easy. I work fast with Phaere's time limit. When I return, out of breath, Taso Kala gives me...absolutely nothing I can or can't use. Just nothing at all; tells me I can continue to exist and she has no further use for me. Nice lady...pleasure to serve, ma'am, hope your cavern collapses.

I have made it within Phaere's time limit, and my final goal, the reason I came here, is within reach. Phaere tells me why the items I gave the Matron are required: they are going to summon a powerful demon to slaughter the surface elves with. The magically potent blood and eye is the bait to attract it, and the eggs of Adalon are the gift to be presented to it to earn its alliance. She has made fake eggs, and wants me to steal the real ones, bring them to her, and substitute the fakes. She hopes to become the Matron Mother by doing so. Another typical task from her...she will become the Matron because the real Matron will be killed by the Demon Lord for offering fakes, and she will then step in like a little hero and offer the real ones. Of course I will steal the real ones, just to keep them safe...but then what? The city has been sealed by the Matron mother so that nothing will disturb their ritual. I can't leave until the ritual is done, or until the Matron Mother is dead, which will break the wards. If I kill her, I may be doomed...I will complete this task but I know not what its resolution will be. I depart with a heavy heart for the Temple of Lolth.

Before I go, I decide I will check into this mage tower business. I don't have a time limit for retrieving the eggs, so I had best go while I have a chance. I enter...and there is indeed a lich. He imprisons me...I don't have a chance, I can't even move...and I end up...I end up in Jarlaxle's headquarters. He is part of the scheme. The rope actually worked, not only lowering the wards but also redirecting the Imprisonment target to here, rather than some tiny sphere deep underground with myself in suspended animation for hundreds of years until someone happened by blind luck to cast Freedom in the area. They explain that they need me to retrieve gems that contain the souls of Jarlaxle's men that the lich stole...a likely story, but at least I will get to kill a lich and take his goodies for whatever reason. And, they know who and what I am. I am returned to the mage tower. When I retrieve the gems, I will be automatically pulled back to Jarlaxle.

The lich is, well, like the other liches. I throw up a Spell Trap before I even go in, which is a good decision. He doesn't have another Imprisonment up his sleeve though. I immediately cast Summon Hakeashar, so that even if he kills it, it at least took the brunt and not me. He does. I summon some Ogres, and like the lich I fought previously, he is not immune to their normal weapons. He wastes numerous spells getting rid of them. When he summons an Efreeti, I immediately toast it with Death Fog, which also damages him. He throws a few Fingers Of Death at me, and I get Summon Hakeashar back due to the Spell Trap, but if I use it, the Death Fog will kill it. His Mislead comes after me, so I turn the Staff on it while the spells he flings at me get lower and lower in level. Finally I can put on the Cloak Of Reflection and bash him, which finishes him for good. He drops a House Jae'llat wardstone and one of his teeth. I have to Knock two of his chests but it is worth it; there are numerous scrolls in his house of spells I don't have yet, too many to mention, but I don't pick up the gems that I was sent here for yet. His tooth lowers the wards of the upper floor, and a pond contains three King's Tears, five Pearls, a rogue Stone, a few other gems, and several magical weapons and scrolls. I only find one I don't have yet in my spellbook: Cacofiend. I take all the items to the merchants at the front entrance and sell them off, then return for the gems. As soon as I pick them up, I am gated back to Jarlaxle. Indeed, this was a ruse: he just wanted his payment from House Jae'llat and I was the patsy to steal the gems for him, and they certainly weren't his men's souls. I play along as I didn't believe them anyways, and he says I am a "good sport" before returning me to the mage tower.

Just before returning to the Temple Of Lolth...I remember something. There are slaves from the surface in Ust Natha in pens, just north of the bar, including children. Only those of a House can buy them. I was nothing when I entered, now I am a highly respected male with the foremost House Despana's favour. I speak to the slaver and he is glad to get rid of them. I can buy them all for one thousand gold with nothing, or for two thousand gold equipped, armoured and armed, ready for battle. I wouldn't want to let them into the Underdark without the best possible protection, so I buy them all, armoured and armed, and tell them they are to be free, to tell the gate guards they are on a mission for me and get to the surface...I know they will. My reputation increases again, but this time I don't mind at all. I return to my mission to the Temple.

Just before I enter the Temple...I stop. A dimension-door clearly is appearing before me, and I shudder at what I could have done wrong...I didn't have a time limit. What's happening? I have come so far...I was so close. My relief at seeing my friend appear from it is almost more than I can bear. Solaufein has come through for me more than I ever could have hoped for. From the shadows, he has been watching the activities and plans of Phaere's double-cross and has come up with a little variation of his own. My confiding of my mission to him only helped him in this. He has had fake silver dragon's eggs made as well, but Phaere will not recognize them and will think they are the real ones. I can steal the real ones, substitute Phaere's fakes for them, then give Solaufein's fakes to Phaere while keeping the real ones for Adalon. I take Solaufein's gift to me and he again departs, probably forever this time...I know I will miss my friend and always wonder how things turned out for him for the rest of my days.

I enter the Temple, and the invisibility of the Staff makes the process very easy. Heading to the northeast, a long path curves around the temple proper to the egg chamber in the far north. The door opens with the key Phaere gave me. Several golems are inside protecting the precious contents, but they are blind to me. I remove the genuine eggs from their container and put Phaere's eggs where they were, then depart, closing the door so that the golems can't follow. I notice the two Egg Guards have gone hostile, but no one else has; a good sign. I return with all speed to Phaere, and I am very careful to give to her the eggs that Solaufein gave me, not the real ones. She is pleased of course, and tells me to meet her in the Temple immediately for the ritual, and dimension-doors away. As soon as she does, an Imp appears, a servant of Adalon. It tells me a few really obvious things that would have been required if the only one available one for this job had a Feeblemind cast on them, but hello...go back to preening your wings or whatever Imps do when they aren't delivering really obvious messages. Yes, thank you...I rather figured out that the priestesses might get a bit mad when I cause the death of the Matron Mother and her heiress, and I might consider leaving Ust Natha when this is done. Really? And I was just about to set up shop in Deirex's place and maybe become a lich myself. I'm already doing this for Adalon's benefit and I don't need some hellspawn putting pressure on me when I'm 99.9% done, comprehend? It leaves and I hurry to the Temple.

The plan works well. The Matron Mother Ardulace's ritual gates a Lesser Demon Lord. She offers Phaere's fake eggs to the Tanar'ri, and is struck down immediately by a Flamestrike. Phaere, as planned, steps forth and confidently offers Solaufein's fakes. She is stunned to find out they are fake as well, and dies screaming curses of my name...but instead in my mind I hear Solaufein's laughter. The Tanar'ri asks if anyone else has anything to offer it, and I reply "Return to whence you came. Your summoners are dead." It obligingly disappears. The Matron Mother's corpse reveals several thousand gold pieces, three Rogue Stones, magical armour and a Ring Of Spell Turning. Phaere's corpse holds nothing but the items I have given her. I take Solaufein's Piwafwi Cloak to remember him by, then recall it will turn to dust when I leave the Underdark. Instead I keep the fake eggs he made for me. I leave Ust Natha immediately without speaking to anyone, the Boots Of Speed working harder than ever to make the door before the word gets out about me and the whole place goes hostile. Just before I exit...I hesitate. Why hurry? I don't have to run. I am impervious. Let them go hostile; I could take on a thousand Drow and if not one can see me it's no more difficult than taking on one. I could wipe this place right out. It might take a while, but I have nothing but time now: I have the real eggs, the gates are open and there is no Matron Mother to close them. But I reconsider as Solaufein again enters my thoughts, and I think of how many others like my friend might be here, how many others could be like him if only they live to hear there is another way, another goddess, and another chance. And so I pass through the gates of Ust Natha for the last time.

Returning to Adalon, she rewards me with...a nice crossbow I can't use, and then transforms herself into her humanoid form that I so longed to see, which to look upon is worth more than any crossbow...the Svirfneblin was understating when he said she was beautiful. But she will leave this place and never return, I fear. We transport to the Drow party near the Kuo-Toa lair that I originally bypassed, and she assists me greatly in purging them, casting several Lower Resistances so my spells can get through, and a few other deadlies that leave me half as many enemies to deal with. Then she is gone to where Silver Dragons go when it's time to move on, and I am filled with a sense of longing as I know I will probably never see her again.

Through the door, past a Drow war party I clump and then Cloudkill is the disputed border between the surface elves and the Drow, and they are battling fiercely here. Forgetting all thought of personal well-being, I drink an Oil Of Speed, wield the Staff Of Rynn and wear the Frost Giant Strength Girdle, then smash into the Drow as hard and fast as I can. I take a lot of damage but get it back almost as fast from the two Rings Of Gaxx. Amazingly, two of my instant-death spells work perfectly: I manage to Disintegrate one Drow and Chromatic Orb kills another instantly...very lucky. I hit the Wand Of Monster Summoning twice to raise Gnolls and Hobgoblins to distract the Drow from their task of killing the elves, who seem pathetically weak compared to them, with no magic resistance, or magical weapons and armour, casting first-level spells against opponents with +3 weapons, +5 armour and 65% or more magic resistance. I suppose that the elves are only holding out by sheer force of numbers; their casualties must be terrible. Today, however, only a few die and the Drow are slaughtered.

After five days in the sea, under the sea, and underground, I finally emerge into a place too bright and beautiful for me at first: a forest. There are many elves here, mostly warriors. At first they think I am a Drow, but quickly realize I am not...good thing Adalon dispelled the illusion. I am taken to see their leader, General Elhan. At first he is defensive and suspicious, and I don't blame him a bit as humans don't usually come popping out of the Underdark in the midst of battles with the Drow, but I am able to convince him that we are here for the same reason: Jon Irenicus. He has stolen the elves' entire city of Suldanessellar by hiding it beneath a cloak of illusion and they cannot return until the Rhynn Lanthorn, an ancient artifact lantern, is found. It will dispel any illusion that gets in its way of returning to there. Who would have known removing this lantern was the only way to cloak the city, and exactly where it was and how to retrieve it? Only other elves, only Irenicus and Bodhi. I will have to finish Bodhi once and for all. 

But Elhan lies when he says this conflict was born in the mind of a human...barefacedly lies, and no War Sage checks his statements as they are checking all of mine. Clearly the elves are embarrassed that their Exile (which is what they call Irenicus) has caused them more distress than they thought was in his power. They should know better than to lie to a mage about anything elven; magic being in the nature of elves and so many elves being powerful mages, an acolyte spends much time studying elven lore, magic and history. Suldanessellar is the cornerstone city of elves, built on trees, the largest being the source of their lifeforce, what keeps them nigh-immortal but without negative effects. If Irenicus, whose immortality was stripped from him and who has my soul, has stolen this place after being removed from it, he wants that tree to himself. I wonder how far he has succeeded. I obtain several sets of stakes and three vials of holy water blessed by Rillifane Rallathil, the elven god whose avatar is said to dwell within the tree. If so, none could be more potent, as he will suffer more than any other deity could at the hands of Jon Irenicus.

Day 48
------
I am back in Athkatla. I sell off gems and other items, and now have over 235,000 gold pieces. Money will certainly never matter to me again. I had an interesting experience returning: I was waylaid by Drizzt Do'Urden and his famous party of adventurers while they were searching for a lost warhammer. I had a friendly enough chat with him, but I think Cattie-Brie was a little confused as she kept peppering me with arrows. Perhaps she thought I had stolen his armour and swords when I first met him back in the wilds near Nashkel, but why would a mage, especially a nice one, do such a thing? Drizzt was willing to help me should I require it, but I don't want any others shouldering these burdens. I am certain that although Drizzt would emerge unscathed, his friends would be massacred by the vampires I know I must face. I check with Ribald Barterman and he has a few items I could use that he never showed me before. I buy every 8th level spell he has that I don't know already: Pierce Shield, Power Word: Blind, Incendiary Cloud, and Symbol: Death from Lady Yuth. I buy all of his 9th level spells as well, though I can only cast them once. Never know when these might come in handy, and there isn't much else I can use to spend money on.

I memorize two of the spells (Symbol: Death and Incendiary Cloud), change a few more and rest. Without hesitation or contemplation, I am off to the cemetery to meet whatever gruesome fate Bodhi has in store for me, and I for her. I don't have to wait long: she confronts me right at the front gate with four vampires, then leaves, thinking they will finish me. I simply read a scroll of Protection From Undead, after pulling off all the magic resistance items I can so that it works properly and then replacing them. They then ignore me, flitting here and there as if I don't exist. I don't have to worry about protections or Armour Class, and I can use the Staff Of Rynn and Girdle of Frost Giant Strength. I beat them handily into the ground with no damage, not even any opposition. My biggest challenge is just keeping up with their endless running to and fro, so I switch to the Sling when they get too far away.

It is no different when I enter the underground. There are at least fifteen vampires down here, and they might as well be fifteen petrified Gibberlings. I will have to find out who enchanted these scrolls and thank them for saving me from a gruesome death. As I noted before, vampires are regenerative, so I gulp an Oil Of Speed between Staff whacks to hurry their demise. One near the horrid spike chamber is a spellcaster, I talk to him to force him acknowledge my existence and he throws on his protections, then I blissfully slip back to non-entity status and finish him with the weaker but dispelling Staff Of The Magi. I remember the three coffins near the entrance and return several times to ensure that any of the more powerful vampires are staked. I hit a couple with flame columns from the Fire Wand to ensure they fall, and cast Sunfire to kill two immediately, and a Skull Trap to kill more. Into the blood pool in the northwest chamber goes one of the vials of Rillifane's holy water, and the neutralizing reaction between the light magic of the water and the dark magic of the pool froths and churns the blood. It goes still, and I know that many of the of vampires will now regenerate more slowly, and will not return when they fall.

When the dining area is cleared of them, I descend to the octagonal chamber where I know Bodhi must be...as far from me as possible. Protection from Undead has recently run out, but I have seven more of these scrolls and can read one whenever I wish; Bodhi might have something to tell me before I send her to the Abyss. Perhaps she will shed a little light on the situation, a sort of deathbed confession from one who died long ago but refused burial. There are three vampires here, two Grimwarders, and Bodhi of course. She "greets" me and our exchange goes as I expected...she tells me nothing I didn't know but at least comes clean with her elven background and her knowledge of Elhan. Her words are defiant as usual but there is fear behind them...I have come farther than she ever expected, and she knows I will not stop until she is removed from this world. I will deal with her one-on-one, face-to-face, with no scrolls or tricks...I equip the Staff Of The Magi and am invisible to them all. With two Skull Traps and a Sunfire interspersed with Staff blows, she is alone in the dim chamber, and a second vial of holy water in the blood pools has neutralized her last connection to her vampirism. Cut off from her second lifeforce as she was from her first, there is nothing left for Bodhi, and suddenly I pity her and the depths to which one can sink to shakily grasp any fleeting trace of existence rather than surrender to the nothingness...I choose the nothingness over where she is about to find herself due to her refusal of it.

Bodhi is alone, but still deadly. She will hit me fast and hard, I must return those offenses with ones of my own. She is also highly magic resistant, so I first cast Lower Resistance on her to make this a little more manageable. Foolishly thinking this could be easy, I cast Disintegrate at her...and it is successful, but she has powers I dare not imagine as another Bodhi rises phoenix-like through her own dust to replace the one I destroyed. I drink another Oil Of Speed, Stoneskin and raise a Fireshield, wield the Staff Of Rynn and wear the girdle of Frost Giant Strength, then charge to the fray. I have eight Stoneskins she must cut through with her devastating hands to reach me, and with every strike the Fireshield damages her while I am unharmed and continue to pound her closer to the oblivion she so desperately avoided. It doesn't take as long as I expected; she dies just after the last Stoneskin is gone, though with the regeneration I possess and the battle-fury that has possessed me I would have continued long afterwards, perhaps to my own death.

Almost lost in the oppressive gloom of the chamber, a bat escapes from her evaporating corpse and I follow it to the boat of the dead in the northeast chamber that contains her coffin. Death, said the culture that created this elegant mode of funerary conveyance, is a journey down a river. But Bodhi's river is of lava, and her destination unquenchable fire that would consume this craft to ash in seconds. Though only a bat entered the coffin, her body is there when I open it; I stake her as I did the others, still feeling the pity but no remorse, and her black heart separates from her body in my hand as she withers before my eyes to take on the appearance that she should have had without the blood of innocents and rituals of darkness. The sought Rhynn Lanthorn gleams in her final resting place, and the vampires of Athkatla are finally just a fading memory out of nightmare. I find a few other interesting items in the coffin's boat and elsewhere in the lair, including a selection of unique tomes on vampirism and the ways of curing it (and the lost god Amaunator, whom I had hardly heard of before my adventures is once again mentioned) but my mind is somewhere else right now, far from items and money. I stumble into breaking daylight surprised at just how long this ordeal took, and find the walk back from the cemetery difficult, resting almost immediately and falling into a blackness where no dreams...or nightmares...can live.

Day 49
------
I awaken in the middle of my rest briefly, perhaps from a noise as it is daytime outside, and when I return to sleep, a vision meets me on a great tree's limbs, and I know it is THAT tree that I mentioned before. The vision shows me the mass murder that Irenicus has wrought upon the elves, and tells me that I must stop him, for my own sake as well as theirs.

I know I am entering the final days of my journal now and my saga's time is running short...I have nothing left now but to pursue the course that has been charted to me by Irenicus and I leave Athkatla upon awakening without bothering to say goodbye, even in my mind, to the city I have explored and come to know these past weeks. For two-thirds of a day I walk in a straight and unwavering line towards the place where the sunlight first hit my eyes after days in the Underdark. No brigands waylay me for my gold. I see not another sentient being before reaching the elven encampment. A word comes into my mind...it is a word whose meaning I distrust and refute, but it speaks clearly and quietly all the same: Destiny.

Day 50
------
When I return the Lanthorn to Elhan, he is no more helpful with information than before...after the risk I took in singlehandedly rescuing it for him...no better than the Roenalls though I suppose he has a better reason for his actions. We are transported to the hidden entrance of the forest city of Suldanessellar, made even more so by Irenicus' illusions. They are dispelled as predicted by the Rhynn Lanthorn and we enter. Elhan briefs us on the nature of what we face: the Rakshasa are here. I am sure given the ease I have defeated them with before that far worse can be found. Dead elves litter the once-beautiful city; Irenicus has been very busy indeed.

I must find Demin, the elven priestess who may have some knowledge of how to open the palace where Irenicus has sequestered himself. I take the west path and run into a large group of Golems, several Stone and two Adamantites. I break out the Rod Of Smiting golem-slayer that I purchased in Ust Natha and wear the Frost Giant girdle. By alternating between the Staff Of The Magi for its invisibility and the Staff Of Smiting when ready to strike, I fell all the Stone Golems, and not having the luxury of time, use tactical invisibility to lure the Adamantites to a dead-end platform where they will loiter and harm no one. I return to where I found two of them, and a raised platform holds two elven children, who I convince to go to the front gate to be evacuated. The Golems will not see them; they are too far up the dead end. I enter the Priests' House; the priests are dead. I find a 9th level spell scroll here: Meteor Swarm. In a desperate situation, I may be able to cast this from the scroll, losing it in the process. On the east side of the circular structure, there is a box which has several buttons that I have to press in "The Natural Order." Elven history was a subject that I didn't skimp on (perhaps to impress that elven mageling, I imagine) and I am able to press the buttons in the order of: Correlan Lotharian (from whom all elven gods sprung,) Rillifane (the god of this tree and therefore the bearer of elven immortality and lifeforce,) water (from which the tree grows,) the Tree Of Life itself, and then finally Suldanessellar. When I do, I receive the Talisman of Rillifane. I have no idea what to do with it, so I put it away for now.

I continue east, and four elves are being attacked by three Skeleton Warriors. Although I summon Dire Wolves to keep the Skeleton Warriors distracted, disregard my own safety by using the Staff Of Rynn and wading into them, and don't waste time by bothering to protect myself first, I am unable to save any of the elves. I feel impotent, useless and enraged by this. I am able to vent my rage on a Nabassu that I next encounter. It does not throw spells at me, so I can lead it to where there are no elves for it to kill with the Boots Of Speed while flinging Sling bullets at it, which do full damage. Seven bullets is all it takes.

When I return to the place the demon was...there is a Drow fighter/mage named Raamilat there, but he is no Solaufein. Irenicus must have hired him as a guard, as this is the Priestess Demin's home. He cockily challenges me. I throw on the Cloak of Non-Detection and grab the Staff just before the bastard casts Time Stop and he has no one to throw his three rounds of spells at when the casting is done, so completely wastes an exceedingly potent 9th level spell on True Sights that don't work. Stupid move number one. Stupid move number two is casting Gate against a mage who's dealt with Gate before and knows that running just out of their visual range is all it takes for demons with the intelligence and loyalty of a turnip to attack their summoner. He wastes Abi Dalzim's Horrid Wilting and Maze (whew!) getting rid of it. And the third and final stupid move in the list (the rule of threes must apply) is mixing it up with a mage with the Staff Of The Magi. He must be wearing elven (not Adamantine as we're outdoors) chain to allow spellcasting; his armour class is poor against blunt weaponry compared to the Drow warriors I had tangled with in the Underdark, and I don't miss a hit bashing his spider-loving waste-of-an-18-intelligence brains in.

When I enter the house of Priestess Demin, three Rakshasa are there. She begs me to protect her from them, and I know I cannot...not in the usual way. I have no spells that will affect all of them at once; few spells will affect them at all. She will be dead long before I bring them down. A man whose mind was not his greatest asset would see no hope, but instead of eliminating the three enemies, I take the simpler route of eliminating the one friend. I cast Maze on her, and she disappears temporarily and harmlessly. Without her to focus on, the Rakshasa turn on me, and I know just where to lead them. Someone else's mazing should just be ending about now, or very soon...I lead them outside and into the waiting arms of the Pit Fiend summoned by Raamilat. Their spells are useless against it, and it kills one of them outright, brings another near death and injures the third before they send it back to hell. I take them down at my leisure and return to the unharmed Priestess Demin who thanks me for saving her, albeit in a strange way. In her home, I find another 9th level spell scroll: Absolute Immunity, which makes one immune to all normal and magical weapons and physical attacks of creatures, except for those with greater than +5 enchantment, which I have never heard of. I save this one for later as well, another one-use item.

I finally get an insider's explanation for Irenicus' actions and it isn't too different from the one I already knew. This isn't the first time he violated the Tree Of Life. His exile from the elven community and banishment from their afterlife was caused by his first attempt to "merge" with the tree and become godlike. Queen Ellisime decided he was to be banished so that he would have taken away from him what he had almost taken from all other elves; as he had been socially prominent the death penalty was not imposed. Bodhi had purposely become a vampire before Irenicus was able to develop the method by which they stole the souls of Imoen and I; Irenicus must have known more about the effects of vampirism, or had too much confidence in his abilities, to do the same. He has sealed the palace to the point that it would that it would take a god to open it...and that is exactly whom I must summon. I am not afraid; I would like to meet one to finally know without needing weak-watery faith or feelings whether they are godly, whether they deserve the worship that is accorded them. The Talisman I found is one of the three components required...and Irenicus' black dragon in the northwest may be holding one of them to keep Rillifane Rallathil from being summoned by the elves to disturb his plans.

Knowing that another component is there I must go immediately to where the Black Dragon awaits...and this one will not wait around for me to prepare, I fear, if it let it know I am there. On the way to meet it, another group of elves are massacred before my eyes, by three golems this time, and I can do nothing until it is too late. There are two Iron and a Sand Golem. The Sand is weak but constantly hastes itself and the other two, so I deal with it first, then the Iron Golems, using the same technique of swapping the Rod Of Smiting and Staff Of The Magi. They get a couple of nasty knocks in but I am fully recovered in seconds. The bridge to the northwest and Irenicus' Black Dragon awaits.

The other dragons were juniors compared to this one, who as I expected didn't stand around much arrogantly expecting that a tiny human couldn't touch him, and had a few tricks up his sleeve to frustrate we mages...but I have a few tricks of my own, and since I'm writing this, you can probably guess who walked back over the bridge wondering where he was going to rest, having exhausted most of his spells in one battle, but having suffered no damage whatsoever (that time...there was a secret to this battle, which when found made it go from damn near impossible to a walk in the forest, dear journal, and I hesitate to mention it lest others read this and dragon-slaying heroics fall to the level of mere workaday washing, but I will have to be through if this is to be a meaningful or believable disclosure.)

Nizidramanii'yt (for that was his name) was out of sight when I left five Skull Traps near the bridge, but not too close I would trigger them by standing close to it...I needed a little maneuvering room as I would be sprinting too fast to be in full control when I returned to them. I headed west but not south, as this is where he waited. Just before his visual range, I cast...Mordenkainen's Sword. Now here is the secret, dear journal: A dragon will attack physically if you are close, and magically with his breath if you are distant. Mordenkainen's Sword is immune to all physical attacks. So even if it never struck Nizidramanii'yt, it would be sufficient to just soak up all his attacks by being close, being immune the sword would last for the spell duration and the dragon would ignore me until it was gone. As well, a piece of magical metal has good saving throws against Wing Buffet and would most likely not become unconscious. Had I summoned monsters, they would be ripped to shreds within a few rounds and I would then be Nizidramanii'yt's next meal before I got another spell off.

The magical sword had another good purpose: it soaked up the Insect Plague that Nizidramanii'yt cast to destroy my spellcasting ability by causing me to be encased in a swarm of biting insects and slowly nibbled to death. All in all, a most valuable ally.

I send the sword south ahead of me, out of visual range, and then follow it, so that Nizidramanii'yt can finally see me. I don't bother with fancy words or banter...I merely call Nizidramanii'yt a "wyrm" which is sure to provoke him and stop all attempts at further conversation, and attack him magically by casting Lower Resistance, the first of two. The sword attacks him physically. Nizidramanii'yt stoneskins and hastes, then casts the dreaded Insect Plague; I run just north out of its range and back again, and the sword has absorbed it; no swarm haunts my every step and the next Lower Resistance can be cast. Nizidramanii'yt adds to the danger by casting Plant Growth (I had no idea a dragon could be a cleric) but the sword is unharmed whether trapped or not and I am just beyond the growth's border. Nizidramanii'yt now concentrates all his effort on physically destroying Mordenkainen's Sword, and to no effect at all. While he does, he is ignoring me and naked against magic, and I can cast Greater Malison at him and then summon a spellcasting ally with the Efreeti bottle to cause as much damage to him in as short a time as possible, while I still have the sword. I do so, and the Efreeti and I throw everything we can at him. I hit him with the Fire Wand's column of fire several times and cast Magic Missile twice, while the Efreeti casts Magic Missiles of his own, Agannazar's Scorcher, Flame arrow...and then runs forward when I don't tell him to cast another spell quickly enough and gets stuck in the foliage. Not what I was expecting, but I keep up the pace, and the Efreeti is soon free and unharmed as Nizidramanii'yt is still determined to damage that immune sword. I back the Efreeti off a bit to avoid him being closer to Nizidramanii'yt than the sword is, and have just enough time for him to get off a Flamestrike before he unsummons. The Sword quickly does the same, and now I am alone with Nizidramanii'yt, but I am not worried.

Protection From Magical Weapons casts instantly, and I can now lure the badly injured Nizidramanii'yt close to the Skull Traps immune to his attacks as I don't want to get too far from him, lest he decide to breathe on me. He follows close behind and I know I would be getting ripped apart terribly if not for this fine piece of abjuration magic that protects me. As I approach the Skull Traps, I sprint, breaking away from him in a semi-circle that leaves me on the other side of them as his Haste has expired and I now outrun him easily. Nizidramanii'yt charges across them and dies, leaving one unexploded. I have to explode it to pick up the items he has dropped, but I make my magic resistance save and am unharmed. Irenicus' great black dragon is no more, and I take a small amount of pleasure in the fact that the elves' wards will never allow him to ethereally travel from this place; without Nizidramanii'yt, he is now trapped here to his death, regardless of my success or failure in defeating him and his allies...that is, unless he becomes a demi-god.

The dragon's corpse reveals several valuable jewels, a suit of Elven Chain which fighter/mages can cast spells in, but...you know the drill, journal...and the Golden Goblet Of Life, the second of the three parts required to summon the avatar of Rillifane. I don't need the money from the jewels anymore, but I take them anyway, as I certainly earned them, and depart the way I arrived over the wooden bridge back to the warzone of Suldanessellar. I have a map of the city from Elhan, and I don't want to visit any locations other than those I absolutely need to get the job done without any more risk to the elves or myself. The House Of The Moon certainly sounds like a place to find the Moonblade, so I travel there immediately.

I don't have to fight for it, though a Balor is present. A brave elf, wounded terribly, is holding it, and the Balor demands the blade, saying his life will be spared if he gives it up. Rather than do so, he calls to Rillifane for death and victory, and both of them die. A noble and selfless act...I will avenge these gentle and merciful people for what Irenicus has done to them though it may cost me my life, for I have no life left if Irenicus survives. I no longer cling to the views that I have for so long; passion and hardship, blood and fire have shaped me into a new form, and I have seen enough of the evils of the world to know that I will use what I have and what I can do to fight them while there is breath in me. I may even have changed alignment, though I will have to check this at a later time...when this is over. I take the blade, the work of master craftsmen and enchanted over the course of years by the finest in magery. It is magicless, mute and cold dead steel in my hands, and would be in any others that had not attuned themselves through elven ritual to unlock its powers. I find my third 9th level spell in this place: Gate. I will only read this scroll as a last resort.

There is no delaying...there must be none...I am not tarried in the slightest as I approach the Temple Of Rillifane on the opposite side of the treetop city. Five Rakshasa stand guard outside it; I ignore them and pass invisibly within. A mage, an Iron Golem, a Rakshasa and a Tanar'ri await me. They oppose no one but a human mage, drained of spells, carrying a few elven artifacts; who would guess that they have but seconds to live. The Tanar'ri can see through my invisibility, but I feel no concern for anything except placing the three artifacts into the altar in the centre...the enemies have approached me too closely for me to escape now, but I am overwhelmed with a feeling of peacefulness, the calmness before a great storm, a security that something powerful and yet benevolent is protecting me.

A loud rumble bursts forth from the altar, the shaking of the Temple almost knocks me over, and a large form appears...for the second time in this journal I am able to document that I have come face-to-face with a god, or at least an avatar of one, and this time there is no denying its godliness. Like a lost and frightened child I seek shelter in its shadow from the encircling horde. Enraged at my enemies, it smashes all of them instantly like teacups beneath a hammer and then speaks to me, in a booming voice of clear reason. It...he...the avatar of Rillifane Rallathil tells me that the palace is open now to me, but I must be the one to end Irenicus' assault on the Tree Of Life. When I try to speak back I am interrupted when half-done, not through rudeness but through divination that is able to predict the remainder of my question and answer instantly. Rillifane summons his forest spirits to cleanse the city of Irenicus' minions, and departs. I am now safe from anything that is left, and I so leave too. I have met true godly power, and was not afraid, was not struck down by it, because I was doing the right thing...I was rescued by it in fact. I leave feeling as though I am the luckiest man alive.

Day 51
------
The forest spirits have removed some of the taint of Irenicus, and I can now explore Suldanessellar in relative safety, and find two more elven artifacts: a horn and a harp. The Stone Golem in the House Of The Horn falls as I enter, and the elves within are free to leave. There is a cloak here called the Cloak Of Elvenkind that adds 50% to the wearer's Hide In Shadows, and they match a pair of boots I had found earlier that do the same to Move Silently. I remember the Piwafwi Cloak of Solaufein and how one item was able to do 75% in both, and improve resistance to breath weapons by a surprising amount...the Drow have much we could learn from if they could be persuaded to teach it.

I still encounter some enemies that I had missed before as I had tried to collect the artifacts as quickly as possible. I find two trolls attacking several elves but again I cannot save the elves. In desperation I throw a Cloudkill at the trolls; they die instantly having low hit dice. However, I make a stunning (at least to me) discovery when the Adamantite Golems that I had hidden up a dead end charge into the scene and attack me...and take damage from the Cloudkill! I have finally discovered their fatal weakness and they are all dead in a few rounds, having been weakened by me before. Whereas I could do at most two or three points per strike no matter what my strength or weapon, Cloudkill does the full 1 to 10 per round on them. I would not have thought it possible, but there they lie dead as proof.

Finally, I am ready to enter the palace. Suldanessellar is free of the minions of Irenicus. No guardians appear when I step through the door. There is a tree growing here, a tree that is actually a mere twig of the Tree Of Life below me that this palace is built on, and in. I wonder how many of humankind have glimpsed it. Nuts grow on it, and they seem magical, and they seem to want me to pick one. When I do, all of them fall off...I glance around half-expecting to meet the stares of disapproving elves having to deal with the second mage attempting to mess with their tree...but no one is there. I suddenly realize that I didn't pick the nuts: instead Rillifane Rallathil wanted me to have them. So, I carefully gather them into my pack and continue into the foyer, which I find absolutely beautiful, an indoor forest glen. Birdsong fills the air, and twin waterfalls converge into a glimmering pool. A fountain plays nearby amidst huge green leaves that cover the walls and floor. I need to rest, and I couldn't hope for a more relaxing and tranquil place than this to do so before my inevitable confrontation with Irenicus, which I know will not be as simple I would hope. Changing a few spells, I let the environment drift me into blissful slumber.

When I awaken, I check the area, and notice that the two statues beside the fountain are missing one piece each: the horn and harp I had found earlier. When I replace them the waterfalls are stopped, the pool is gone, and in its place is a stairway downwards...down to what I know is my final confrontation with Irenicus. One of us will die, and whether he or I, I have done the best I can and have no regrets. He will never leave this place; soon the elves will return and mass on him, and they have power enough drawn from their home that they will smash him. As soon as Irenicus' connection to the Tree Of Life is severed, Rillifane will wreak his revenge on him. So he is doomed, regardless of one human mage's intervention. But I would enjoy it if it were me who struck his death-blow.

Descending, I find I am not in some gloomy dungeon but on the great limbs of the Tree Of Life in sunlight. Queen Ellisime, projecting her image from the cage Irenicus has imprisoned her in, immediately confronts me with a way to defeat Irenucus. He is nigh-invulnerable encased in energy at the tree's centre. He has conjured or cajoled three large insectile parasites to drain the energy of the tree and feed it directly to him...their discharges resemble the rays of Beholder-kin. If I get rid of the parasites, then Irenicus will be vulnerable. When I explore the tree to find these parasites, the nuts from the tree that I found upstairs cause the growth of the tree's limbs, and I can reach areas that would otherwise have been inaccessible. Each one of the parasites summons either two of Air, Water or Fire Elementals to defend itself, but having the Staffs of Air and Earth alternated with the Staff Of The Magi to stay invisible, they are easy, and the Fire ones go down to the Sling. Each parasite is then an effortless kill when its guardians are vanquished.

When the last parasite has fallen...Jon Irenicus is free. Free, but disoriented and more vulnerable than usual, though still deadly. Queen Ellisime is free as well, and confronts him. Not only was he a favourite in the elven court...they were lovers once. What could be have given it all up for, I wonder...power? The coercion of his sister? No matter now; it is over for him. Queen Ellisime departs (thanks for the help) through a dimension-door, leaving nothing but Irenicus and his bitterness, and the battle begins. I don't wait for anything to get started but fling on the Belt Of Inertial Barrier and throw up a Spell Trap immediately, as does he, and then use the Wand Of Monster Summoning to raise a few whatevers for him to waste his spells on. He casts Time Stop and then proceeds to do so. As soon as he is done, I summon a Hakeashar, and let it go to work on him, draining him to nothing (or so I thought would happen) as he already wasted his instant-death spells on the Hobgoblins. The Hakeashar endures, and I can plink away at his Mislead with the Sling until it goes down while the Hakeashar steals one of his high-level spells every round and 4 hit points to boot. When the real Irenicus reappears, I start to work on him...he is now out of spells except for Magic Missile. Unfortunately for me, he has a lot of Magic Missiles...I think it is innate to him and he never runs out of them. The Hakeashar unsummons and he starts to throw them at me instead, about 3 discharges per round. I summon more monsters to take the heat and then cast Spell Immunity: Evocation. Now I am immune to Magic Missiles, and finish him with the Staff easily. I could have used the Cloak Of Mirroring to reflect the Magic Missiles back to him, but I was too worried that he had another instant-death spell up his sleeve to remove the Cloak Of Protection +2. Irenicus was not nearly as difficult as some of the enemies I fought in order to reach him, but mages know best how to take on others of their kind.

Of course, it couldn't be that easy. Irenicus' soul is bound for the Abyss...but he shares the same soul as I do. A strange pulling sensation occurs as though I am standing in a powerful downdraft, but I feel it from the inside as well and lose consciousness. When the blackness dissipates, I am in hell. Perhaps I am dead, or dreaming, but it certainly feels real...I can smell the sulphur, and the far-off cries of the tortured damned ring in my ears. The ground is stone, but warm to the touch. Determined to find out where I am and what I can do, I explore the area. A huge door dominates the north of the cavern. Five eye "locks" surround it and require five keys. There are also five paths leading radially from this cavern. Proceeding clockwise, I take the first, easternmost one.

There is a Tanar'ri here called Pride. He tells me I am a valiant warrior and to kill the beast in the adjoining cavern for one of the Tears Of Bhaal, which I quickly surmise are the keys to those five eye "locks". This is Bhaal's personal property of the Abyss, so I hold some sway here by being of his bloodline. I am sure I can still get my tuckus kicked by things I will run into here regardless, so ask what type of beast it is. One that opposes me and so therefore deserves death, responds the demon. Not good enough...I ask what it is and tell it I don't just kill things because they oppose me. The Tanar'ri admits that I don't have much pride in me to be asking, rather than just killing it...and I have earned the Tear Of Bhaal. It was a test, and the Red Dragon guarding it gives it up without a fuss and departs in a cascade of Flamestrikes.

The second cavern's Tanar'ri is Fear, and he motions to two rooms beyond, neither of which I can see into, and each equal from this perspective. He indicates that he holds a cloak made of nymphs' skins, and that it will prevent me from feeling the fear beyond. I tell him that it's not something that I would wear, and he departs. I wonder what's there...I have a choice to make, right or left. But before I go, I cast a spell to do the same thing that the cloak would have, a cloak that I am sure my refusal to accept was the "test" itself: Resist Fear. I walk forward into the cavern on my right. There is a chest here, and I Knock it open; it holds no Tear Of Bhaal but a nasty Incendiary Cloud trap and some strength and invulnerability potions I can't even use. The Tear itself is found at the far end of the stone partition wall dividing the two halves of the cavern from each other. Unfortunately I make the mistake of checking the other room after I have it, rather than being sensible and just leaving. There are two Elder Orbs here and a Gauth. I immediately wear the Cloak Of Mirroring and cast Spell Immunity: Abjuration to block the Imprisonment spells the Elder Orbs are known to occasionally fling. Luckily I get it active before the Anti-Magic Ray these things throw comes, which I now know is why I had trouble casting spells in their Underdark lair. The Spell Immunity is not dispelled by it. One of the Elder Orbs and the Gauth kill themselves with their own rays, and the second Orb chases me around. It is highly magic resistant. I summon some Ogres with the Wand in case the Imprisonment comes after Spell Immunity has worn off. It stuns one, kills two of the remainder with a Death Ray, then turns on me...and kills itself with another Death Ray after a Cause Serious Wounds. Whew!

The third and southernmost cavern holds another Tanar'ri (I will probably see a lot of them around; this is their world, after all) called Selfish. He explains that he has conjured an innocent human from the Prime Material and I have two path choices: the left will sacrifice me, the right will sacrifice the innocent. I don't really care about the human, but he's still a human, and I wouldn't want to see him die because of my inaction. Besides, this is a test, so I had best do what is required, and it is clear that these tests are to determine how little I have let the nature of Bhaal rub off on me. There are three doors I must open to reach the human. The first takes 2 hit points from me, the second 1 point of dexterity (ouch!) and the third some experience points. My experience doesn't drop as I am way beyond maximum and it came off of the excess, I still have 2,950,000 when I check, and am still Level 17.

The fourth Tanar'ri is Greed, who gives me...a very powerful sword I can't use. The test is to use it to kill an enslaved genie who holds the Tear of Bhaal or to give it to him, either being equivalent. No choice here. Even if I were inclined to kill the genie, I can't use the sword. The fourth tear is mine and he departs, free at last.

There is no Tanar'ri in the fifth and last, though a Tanar'ri would be easy in comparison; there is no "test," yet it is the hardest test of all in terms of endurance and ingenuity. The fifth and last is held by a Wraith of my "brother" (who of course isn't for the reasons I defined earlier) and whom I rid the world of not long ago: Sarevok. He says that he could "teach" me to use the Slayer form and summon it at will, but he's really just jealous that I got it and he didn't. I don't even want it, and I tell him so by telling him I pity him. This enrages him and he attacks me, and yet again, I am reminded of that long-ago battle with Mencar Pebblecrusher in the Promenade...I have to roll 19's or 20's to hit him even with the Sling Of Everard; everything else misses and after hours running and firing, running and firing, he still hasn't gone further than Barely Injured. A truly horrible thought...imagine if he regenerated. I Stoneskin in case I get too close, and even let him hit me once when Stoneskinned to see what his modifier is: it's +15! 15! Only 4 of that is due to the sling I hold, so he must have a strength of 25 and a +4 weapon, or a strength of 24 and a +5 weapon. Nothing else will explain it. Armed battle isn't my strong point, but I need my spells for what must lie at the end of these "tests." I can beat him with the Sling alone by just keeping away from him, being as he is another dumb sword-swinger with no other skills, but I figure that it will take over a day to beat him assuming he has as many hit points as he did in his Temple Of Bhaal beneath the city of Baldur's Gate, so I decide to use magic. He is probably highly magic resistant as he was then, so I cast what I was unable to in that long-past epic battle: three Lower Resistance spells on him in a row. He is now highly susceptible to magic, so I follow with a few Skull Traps. He goes to Injured status. My next step is that wonderful undefeatable spell against sword-swingers: another sword, Mordenkainen's to be precise. and by careful maneuvering I have him worrying about and whacking the damage-immune Mordenkainen's Sword, ignoring me and leaving me free to pepper him with even more damage-causing spells, which unlike weapons never miss. The magic sword has a very low THAC0 and takes huge damage off him too, but he has huger hit points...as it turns out, a truly ridiculous amount that is well over 400, perhaps as high as 480! This is twice as many as a ranking dragon does. I use the Wand Of Monster Summoning to raise some gnolls to surround him...even if they hit only on Critical Hits, with four of them they will have enough attacks that some should connect, and I get two from them, plus all the damage my spells and Mordenkainen's Sword are doing. By the time the sword and gnolls are gone, he is Nearly Dead. However, he could still be hours, and I am tired of waiting. I have him follow me to the centre of the room, drop a Cloudkill there, and hope that the biological effect it has can still affect one long-dead. It does, and I use the trick of running around the perimeter tactically to keep him in the centre taking damage while I am unharmed. He takes full damage, and a second Wand Of Cloudkill hit finally does him in. Some say that to die on one layer of the Abyss is to move to a lower one, some say it is to cease to exist, but whatever it may be, I doubt I will ever see him again. All five Tears of Bhaal are now in my possession...and I can finally determine what's behind the locked door to the north, though I am pretty confident of who, and not what, awaits me there.

There are five locks on the door to match the five Tears I hold. I unlock them, one by one...and find that each one is a gift, a powerful gift that I earned by doing the right thing. Surely one who did the wrong things would not have been entitled to such gifts, given that this power would be abused...or would they?

The first makes me immune to any weapons of less than +2 enchantment. Simply stunning...
The second adds 10% to my magic resistance. Less stunning but still very useful.
The third removes 2 from all my saving throws...my highest with all protections in place is Save Vs. Death, at 0. Very nice.
The fourth gives me +20% to fire, cold and electrical resistance. Also very nice.

I don't open the fifth...but hesitate. I haven't rested yet, I haven't changed spells, I haven't prepared for whatever is coming out of there. I don't know whether I could sleep here; it is hell after all, but it's a necessity. Knowing of Irenicus' power in this infernal place, he will be a more difficult adversary than before; I memorize every single instant-death spell I can: three Disintegrates, five Chromatic Orbs, several Polymorph Others (as he can't be too dangerous as a squirrel,) and ensure I have three Lower Resistances, one Pierce Shield and one Greater Malison. This will bring his magic resistance to zero even if it is total, and destroy his saving throws...with the luck of Rillifane on my side, Irenicus should fall.

I encounter no difficulty resting in hell...I just let my mind drift from this place back to the places I have seen that brought peace and tranquility to me: the Suldanessellar palace, the Sverfneblin inn, the warm and fragrant night on the terraces of Brynnlaw, back and back my mind goes through my adventures and my life...the peaceful house of Mendas on the shore of Ulgoth's Beard after it had been cleansed of cultists and Mendas was no more, the snug halfling dwelling in Gullykin with a warm fire and a friendly tale-teller, back to my once-seeming endless childhood in Candlekeep and my father, my TRUE father Gorion reading to me by candlelight and delighting in the enjoyment he brought to me with tales that inspired the life I lead, back until there is only the darkness of my pre-birthing and the greater darkness that sired me, which does not detract from the peacefulness because I know...I know I have used its power to worthy ends and become a better man for it and risen above it, and for the last time in this journal I sleep.

Final Battle And Epilogue
-------------------------
Elmonster arose on the final day of his saga to defeat Irenicus refreshed, and with little hesitation unlocked the final key on the Abyssal Door, not knowing what he would find, but confident that Irenicus was finished no matter what the outcome of this battle. His Wisdom and Charisma were increased by one point as the final gift to him for obtaining the Tears of Bhaal, and the door opened to reveal nothingness. A great roaring of hot fumes blew him down and back, and the form of Irenicus appeared in a blaze of fire and spell, conjured from the eyes that had served as locks.

Elmonster was calm as he faced this, his greatest challenge, one-on-one with the powerful mage...but Irenicus was not prepared to play fairly. Gesturing, he summoned forth four powerful demons as allies, and transformed himself into the Slayer through the use of the very soul he had stolen from Elmonster. Elmonster, however, was not to be dissuaded. Irenicus had not planned on the Staff Of The Magi, that had seen Elmonster through so many situations that would have been impossible otherwise, and had failed to check that his demons could see invisible creatures, or even that he could. As he had done so many times before, Elmonster wore the Cloak Of Non-Detection and Irenicus and his minions were blind to him. Irenicus, confused by this, cast several useless True Sights and then teleported southward away from his minions...a fatal error, as now he was alone. Elmonster could follow him, and the four demons he had summoned could not follow Elmonster in turn, so were eliminated from the battle to come.

Invisibly catching up with Irenicus, Elmonster struck him once with the Staff, knowing that with the Slayer's regenerative powers he could only damage it slightly and that it would heal almost instantly...but it was not his intention to injure it, but rather to trigger any protections that Irenicus' Slayer might have so that they would not be available to him later. The Slayer Stoneskinned and erected a Spell Shield, and a Mislead, exactly what Elmonster was looking for. Now, there was only to wait for the Mislead to wear off, as he could not target Irenicus' Slayer while it was invisibly misled and had no means of dispelling this, having memorized many destructive spells. As well, he had to drain Irenicus' spells and had no Hakeashar or Nishruu summoning spell memorized to do so with, having removed that to make room for more destructive spells. So he used the Wand Of Monster Summoning several times, summoning more when they had been killed by Irenicus through spells. Irenicus summoned an Efreeti, but Elmonster ignored it. He summoned more monsters instead. Then, Irenicus' Mislead ran out. To ensure that there was nothing more remaining that would destroy the delicate process of finishing Irenicus once and for all, Elmonster again struck him several times with the Staff Of The Magi, and another Mislead was then cast...had Elmonster foolishly started to cast his sequence of spells he would have lost his target and they would have worn off by the time he could continue. The Efreeti unsummoned, and Elmonster waited for the Mislead to wear off, them summoned more monsters. This time, Irenicus' Slayer attacked them physically, killing them instantly but using no magic. He was out of spells. Elmonster struck him once more with the Staff, and no new protections arose to take the place of the ones that had worn off. Irenicus was no more a mage.

Elmonster knew he had to work very quickly. The last remaining protection Irenicus' Slayer had was Spell Turning, so the first spell Elmonster cast to lower his magical resistance was Pierce Shield, which lowered it 27% and dispelled the Spell Turning. He then cast all three of his Lower Resistance spells one after the other and equipping the Staff after each casting to prevent attack, for a total of 108% reduction with the Pierce Shield, which meant the Slayer's magic resistance had to have been reduced to zero. The last spell in the sequence was Greater Malison, which could finally affect the Slayer with no chance of failure as it no longer had any magic resistance. This spell causes all saving throws to be reduced by 4, which is required when going up against powerful creatures and expecting instant-death spells to work.

The final spells Elmonster cast were two Disintegrates. The first was saved against, the second was successful. Very fearful was Elmonster that Irenicus' Slayer might have had that power that Bodhi had possessed, as she had risen from her own dust unharmed when he had cast Disintegrate on her. But Irenicus' Slayer had no such powers. Despite its high regeneration, former magic resistance, and incredible strength and speed, it turned to dust and drifted to the warm igneous rock of the Abyss, and the four waiting demons to the north were struck down by its destruction.

Irenicus arose again in his own form, but it was just a finale before his ultimate demise and his magic had left him...in a brilliant Sunray, Elmonster's soul shot upwards from Irenicus and returned to its rightful mortal coil, and Irenicus began the long fall towards an even lower layer of the Abyss, probably the lowest lava lake, the realm of Demigorgon and Irenicus' original destination in death had not the Bhaal essence of Elmonster stopped his descent short. Imagine the surprise Elmonster must have felt when he then awoke, back in Suldanessellar, under the care of the elves whose city he had saved. He had been feared dead for days, but the elves had kept constant vigil and would not give up on him, knowing full well of the theft Irenicus had performed on his essence. He had indeed been fighting a battle in the realms of death for his own soul, and its return had restored life to him. In less than a day, he was restored to full health and function.

In an elegant ceremony in the Temple Of Rillifane Rallathil where Elmonster had encountered the god's avatar and been finally convinced into accepting gods as real entities worthy of the devotions of sentient beings, Queen Ellisime welcomed his newfound acceptance with a holy relic of the elven pantheon, decorating Elmonster with the Amulet Of The Seldarine, and proclaiming Elmonster eternally welcome in Suldanessellar and a hero to the elves. She also accepted much of the blame for Irenicus' actions, but Elmonster did not believe that she was responsible, convinced that Irenicus would have found some other way, some other horror to commit, if this particular door had not been opened to him.

Elmonster departed Suldanessellar thereafter, but returns from time to time and is welcomed with enthusiasm. He dreams of and works towards a peace between the Drow, and elves and humans, and would like to see this formalized during his lifetime though he knows there is little chance at present. He misses his friend Solaufein and has said so often, and someday he may get to see him again. Although still traveling occasionally, Elmonster has returned to a normal life for a time with few battles, and will probably do so until he is thrust into yet another saga. And he made good on his promise to check his alignment at a temple when his saga had drawn to a close. Forged through passion and hardship, blood and fire as he had noted, Elmonster has shifted to Chaotic Good.

"Chaos shall be sown in their passing..."
-- Alaundo The Wise, prophet and founder of Candlekeep











The Unexpurgated Journal Of Elmonster: Throne of Bhaal
2001 - Aug. - 26
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Prologue
--------

Nothing lasts... correction: nothing good lasts.

Life was good... no, it was wonderful, after Irenicus was finally and irretrievably dispatched. I could have had the world, but I only needed a small part of it to make me happy, so I returned to the quiet island town of Brynnlaw, as I had planned, to live out the dreams that I had formed when passing through this place, dreams that I could finally make into reality. The citizens of Brynnlaw welcomed me to a degree I was not expecting, for I had broken the scourge of the Cowled Wizards, courtesan's guild and pirates who had dominated their town. The Cowled Wizards had been slain by Irenicus' hand, I had taken care of the pirates and Lady Galvena of the so-called "Festhall," and Brynnlaw's mayor, as Ginia had recounted to me, had been murdered by the pirates when they arrived and his body unceremoniously given to the sea. To fill this void of leadership, I was unanimously appointed as the mayor of Brynnlaw. I didn't expect this and I am not the power-craving type, but I decided I could make life much better for Brynnlaw and fulfill the promise the former asylum held much more easily if I accepted.

My first act as mayor was to remove all traces of the ugly past of The Residence For The Magically Deviant, also known as Spellhold. My travels had found me a great deal of wealth as its consequence, so I purchased it and its lands from the Cowled Wizards. Fearing my status as an archmage and a public-relations fiasco, knowing of my support from the entire town and powerful entities within Faerun, they did not outwardly oppose this. Although many of the inmates had been slain by Irenicus in his final vengeful action there, there were several still alive, kept in hidden isolation as punishment for imagined "offences." I sought healers of the mind for these tormented people, and most were able to recover. I had noted when I first came to here that the same anti-magical wards that prevented the inmates' escape would also prevent the miscasting of acolytes from affecting the outside world... a perfect structure in a perfect location. So, in order to help the healed former inmates find a sense of purpose, I hired them to help rebuild this former asylum into the school of magic I had planned.  Those who were beyond help were sent to a far gentler and more humane accommodation recommended by a friend on the Amnish council, one who had always despised the Cowled Wizards.

I found a cozy place to call home, the domed former home of Perth The Adept on one of the upper terraces, though I still traveled occasionally, much in trying to arrange some sort of accord between the Drow and the surface-dwelling races to bring peace to the Realms. But I found the Drow hopelessly devoted to this way of life, and eventually had to conclude that rare exceptions like Drizzt and Solaufein are some sort of mutation of the Drow psyche that can neither be predicted nor encouraged, and that the Drow will eventually drive other races to destroy them (which could be very easily done by pumping a sufficient quantity of strongly poisonous heavy gas into the Underdark, or drilling deep through the seabed into the Underdark and drowning those who don't escape into the surface world to be slaughtered. Eventually this will happen, and none of them seem the least bit concerned about it.)

I spent more of my time on the island as the months went by. The endless summer evenings were spent watching the sun sink beyond the horizon, chatting over tea with interesting people who visited; even Elminster dropped by, and we had a long chat about the state of the world; he seemed remarkably pleased with what I had done, so I completely missed the undertone of his comment about others who share my heritage. I adopted a cat. I caught up on my reading. I enjoyed simply living, and the simple pleasures of a walk by the sea or up into the hills to feel the wind on my face and see nothing but rippling water to the far horizon, having a roof and fireplace to call my own, or a good book awaiting me in a soft chair on a quiet, fragrant evening, and seeing a quiet future ahead of me training interested students from all walks of life and corners of Faerun in the magical arts.

With the bitterness of the island's past a fading memory, Ginia and Ason returned home and Ginia sought me out to thank me for giving her back her place in the world. I saw her several times after this as well, and we gradually discovered that we liked each other; I began to court her in a gentle manner and this developed into what I, for lack of a better word, may call "love" or at least its promising beginnings.

But my thoughts of settling down with her and any hope of lasting serenity died along with her and Ason in the scuttling of their ship during a storm-tossed night on the Sea Of Swords, a senseless act that took their lives and those of other citizens of Brynnlaw returning to their homes and families, and soon afterwards this tranquil and satisfying life, the first inner peace I had known since Candlekeep, disappeared as did my bitter tears into the vastness of the sea when I knew that they would never return again.

Some find no pleasure in simple comforts. Their desires run deeper and are not so easily sated. These desires can fuel the heights of heroism, creativity and prosperity, and, if not properly directed, the depths of cruelty, tyranny, greed... and murder. Five of those who are neither easily sated nor properly directed happen to be my so-called "siblings," and it also because of them that the tranquility of my life has shattered into pointed shards that I will bring to bear on them for helping to destroy my contentment, for Ginia's ship was sunk as a random act of violence by mercenaries heading for Athkatla to make war upon it, under the employ of another Bhaalspawn.

Day 1
-----
A forest. It is a moonless night, and raining. A thunderstorm in a forest at night may scare some, but I merely find it eerie and thought-provoking. Thoughts of time and mortality and the meaning behind existence come easily at a time like this, and are only amplified by the silent visages of the large stone heads scattered about this particular forest. The rain drips on the dead, wherever they may lie, and it runs in rivulets down the heads to collect into trembling pools on the sightless eyes. The statue heads are crying; they are crying for the future of our world, and it seems that only I can save it.

I was sent here by Queen Ellesime, the beautiful elven ruler of Suldanessellar, on my most recent visit. It was not a pleasant one. My heritage, having relaxed its grip briefly, now tightens it further. I don't see anyway out of this place, but I would not have been sent here if there were not a purpose to it all.

There is no one to talk to here, no way out, nothing but forest and rain... and stone heads. I clear my throat and glance around, as if embarrassed to be seen talking to a statue though I have talked to plenty of them before this, and there is probably no one for a days' walk from this place; it seems far from everywhere and everywhen.

When I speak to one of the statues, its eyes blaze with fire and it talks of Bhaal, and prophecy, and fate, and death. Then it says no more, and I am back where I started.

Footsteps approach me... my breath quickens. I have grown unused to this in my quiet time.

She who appears is quite pretty; dark-haired and light-skinned. But there is nothing pleasant in store for us. Her name is Illasera, she is a Bhaalspawn, and she wishes only to end my life.

So, for the first time in months, another death stains my hands. Illasera was certainly not the challenge I expected her to be and I disposed of her quite easily and with more than a few regrets; she leaves some nice armour and a +2 dagger behind, but while I gather her few belongings, I wish only to be home again. My world dims and goes black...

...and I am yet again in the Abyss, in the realm of my sire. I am not in the same place I fought Irenicus in; it has changed somehow. Shields of shimmering magical force block many of the paths out, and the rock has been inlaid with an intricate whirlpool of carved stone. But most strikingly of all, there looms before me a Solar, a large female of pure light and radiance. Like most other powerful beings, though, she offers "guidance" and so forth but nothing really useful. I imagine I'll be fending for myself as I always have. She is gone...

Then before me appears the grim visage of Sarevok, my "half-brother" in the essence of Bhaal, whom I have slain three times already. His eyes still glow with an enraged radiance, but I can see he is different. Whenever I hear that prison reforms criminals I smile to myself knowing that, for many,  it merely makes them worse, but I can tell immediately that the prison of the Abyss has changed Sarevok and I will no longer be slaying him. For a piece of my essence, of that which makes me a child of Bhaal, he will tell me a way out of this place. I will think upon this.

Perhaps you remember, journal, with your fading paper mind, how I thought that the imps in the City-Of-Caverns were "cute"? Well, they have nothing on Cespenar, an Imp who thinks he's my "butler." Apparently he thinks I consider this Abyssal corner to be a comfortable place to live, but he could make the stay more bearable. Apparently he worked for Bhaal before as well. He offers to upgrade my Cloak Of Protection +2 if I find scrolls of Improved Haste and Invisibility, but I don't have them at the moment. I still have the paladin's sword Carsomyr and this could be upgraded with a pommel gem called the Eye Of Tyr as well. He says he knows a lot of other "recipes" too. Currently, the only recipe that interests me is one for getting out of this place.

Other than Sarevok and Cespenar, nothing else lives in this corner of the Abyss. I talk to a Fate Spirit, who can summon anyone who my destiny may interact with; possible traveling companions on the severed threads of opportunity that I never knew. But I am resolute that my pain is mine alone and not selfish enough to share it with anyone... even with Sarevok, who is willing to travel with me. He has suffered enough: three deaths at my hands have paid any price required for his plans of world domination. I submit a fraction of my essence to him and let him down as gently as I can. As I did with Solaufein, I feel a gentle tug of wanting to travel with him... perhaps he can be reformed; then again, he probably already is. But he is conscious now, and living, and getting the second chance few others do; I will leave him with the hope that he will find the simple pleasures that I did. I am a stranger to the emotion of hatred; I have only room for forgiveness and I kill only to defend myself. I forgive you, my half-brother in essence. Live, for you have finally learned the pleasure of simply existing.

In turn for the donation of a fraction of my essence, he is able to open one of the magically barred passageways. I must complete five challenges, and the first to be able to leave this place. I wonder what they might be...

I blunder into the first one with almost no spells memorized, and confront an ex-Bhaalspawn who dies before me. A few Kobolds and Doppelgangers appear, but the doppelgangers' attacks aren't magically enchanted so fail to damage me. Two Drow warriors also appear, and I know from experience that they will see me when invisible and carry +3 weapons. I raise a Fireshield and cast Blur. They do hit me a couple of times, but the more they hit me, the more they injure themselves, and I regenerate quickly. When all are dead, "Retribution" reappears... and I feel that something inside me has changed. I can now return to this Abyssal plane whenever I want to. It will be my "home away from home" for the time being.

I know something else as well: the bonds on my abilities have evaporated like so much morning dew. I haven't risen a level in months, but I do now. I can now practice my use of Darts (not that I ever would, of course) and memorize Level 9 spells. I also gain a new ability of my choice. I have a very difficult time choosing between being able to memorize an extra spell of one level, Energy Blades, Dragon Breath, Comet, Summon Planetar or Summon Fallen Planetar, but I gradually decide on Summon Planetar, knowing that having an ally to distract enemies with has long been one of the better tactics I know of.

I don't stop there. I still have a Potion Of Genius somewhere in the emptiness of my old reliable Bag Of Holding. I drink it, wincing at the bitterness (how ironic that Genius brings bitterness in all its forms.) Cespenar glances over my shoulder as I furiously dig through a scroll case while the potion takes effect. I commence incantation in concordance with the magical theorems of Demograth 1132 DR. Oops... I seem to be getting carried away with the potion's effects again. Scroll after scroll disappears in wisps of magical energy that embed themselves into my spellbook. Cespenar's beady eyes bug out as the incantations fly faster and scrolls evaporate; well over a hundred thousand gold pieces' worth of magic is exhausted, enough money for a fine house, a lifetime's wage for a servant... or just enough magic that I might live through what is to come.

I lose count from the focus of mind required to ensure that no spells are lost or wasted. I check my spellbook afterwards. My one high-level spell (Summon Planetar) has turned into fourteen of them. All of Ribald's stock of level 9 spells is scribed without error, and I can rest now. The 9th level spells I know now: Absolute Immunity, Black Blade Of Disaster, Chain Contingency, Energy Drain, Freedom, Gate, Meteor Swarm, Power Word: Kill, Shapechange, Spell Trap, Spellstrike, Time Stop and Wail Of The Banshee.

I'm most curious about Summon Planetar, so I memorize that and rest. I find I can then leave this place, so I do...

...and, as Sarevok promised me, the way out is not going to take me where I want to go, but instead where I need to be. The powers that be seem to need me in the besieged town of Saradush, where two Bhaalspawn are in contention: Yaga Shura who is attacking the town with an army of Fire Giants, and Gromnir Il Khan (somehow this name is familiar to me) the mad ruler, who has locked himself away in his castle. A woman by the name of Melissan and some townsfolk confront the guards to Il Khan's castle, but they are not permitted entry. It seems that Melissan, for all her "good intentions," was the cause of this by attempting to protect the Bhaalspawn by bringing the treacherous Gromnir Il Khan to this place.

Several of Il Khan's guards are orcs. The guards don't take a liking to my sudden appearance and attack me as the peasants disperse. Once the peasants are far enough away I hurl a Skull Trap into their midst, and three of them lose morale and run away. I pick off the remainders with the Sling of Everard and the Staff Of The Magi. The humans carry +2 Halberds so I Stoneskin and am able to finish them all easily, especially in their dispersed state. While wandering about the town afterwards, I am struck by one of the fiery bombardments being hurled into the place. This is not a good place to be outdoors. I seek the Temple Of Waukeen in the south of the town.

The priestess is very helpful. She knows of a way into Il Khan's castle, but it is a treacherous path through a crypt. From her words, it sounds as though Vampires live there. She gives me a key to enter into the crypt. Taking her advice, I buy five vials of Elven holy water from the temple, and depart.

My next stop is at the Saradush tavern, where I have heard that the tavernkeeper will still deal with outsiders. I sell off quite a few nice items: the Cutthroat +4 blade I retrieved from Bodhi's lair, the Sylvan elven chainmail worn by Illasera, the +2 halberds from Il Khan's guards and some gems. He has many trophy-class weapons for sale, but none of them match what I already have and he isn't selling spells. I'm back to about 124,000 gold pieces, so I am not wanting for anything.

After talking to the innkeeper, I notice someone familiar... Viekang, the man from the Trademeet tavern who vanished when I tried to talk to him. He's a little more settled now and doesn't vanish, and I am finally able to get an explanation for this mysterious event: Viekang is a Bhaalspawn (who isn't these days) whose essence gave him the ability to teleport randomly and involuntarily when he was afraid. He doesn't have much useful information for me though. A man named Peltje tells me that the crypts are full of vampiric ex-courtesans who prey on the tavern's patrons, and then leaves in a tremendous hurry. Another man named Hectan seems friendly enough, but only responds that he knows nothing of the answers to my questions.

Two of Il Khan's soldiers don't take a liking to me questioning their harassing of a waitress (this Ring Of Human Influence doesn't help the situation any) so I take them down. They are easy kills as I still have several Stoneskins active and I can easily stay away from them with the Boots Of Speed; they carry no ranged weapons. I am astounded at how well they are outfitted: all their weapons are +3 enchantment, and their armour is magical. Armaments that would be killed for in the areas around Baldur's Gate are as common as water in these areas.

Exploring the inn further, who should I find but Volothamp Geddarm, aka Volo, the famous renegade chronicler of the Realms. He seems surprised that I travel alone, and though he is happy to see me, he is clearly involved in his writings. I take my leave of the Saradush tavern, though dreading what lies ahead. If powerful warriors with heavily enchanted weapons can't get rid of the dangers in the crypts, I wonder what chances I stand.

I wander about the town until I find a place called the "Arcana Archives." Now, this sounds like the kind of place I could find something useful to me. The proprietor, a Lazarus Librarus, has nothing to offer me: his spellbook was stolen and he suspects the man Hectan who had no answers or me in the tavern. His only clue to the identity of the thief is a track of muddy footprints from his window, too small to be the suspect's.

Of course, when I return to the tavern, Hectan denies any involvement. He doesn't have the book on his person in a pickable place, either, as Lhaeozarus (my ferret familiar, dear journal, in case you have forgotten) soon discovers. Neither does the tavern cat (the only one I have seen so far with a name.) I speak to everyone else there, but there are no other clues. The male courtesan doesn't like me speaking to him at all, and says I will scare away his "clients."

I return to the streets of Saradush. Night has fallen but the bombardment continues. I encounter yet more of Il-Khan's soldiers; these seem intent on hanging a few harmless elves. For once my heritage works to my benefit, and they scatter when I threaten to show them the wrath of a Bhaalspawn. The elves are in need of somewhere to stay; I will keep this in mind.

I am in luck with the next person I talk to: Squip, a small boy that I happen to encounter just after helping the elves. His feet are muddy. He demands a thousand gold for information on the missing spellbook he was paid to steal, but I get away with giving him only five gold pieces... the innocence of childhood. Hectar is still in possession of the book, it seems. Hectar does admit to have stolen it, but only to try and find a way to teleport out of Saradush. He advises me that he will trade the book for a teleportation scroll from Lazarus. Lazarus is only too happy to provide this, but warns that using this scroll will be certain death because of the wards that the attacker Yaga Shura has erected. I can choose to warn Hectar of this, if I so desire.

I've seen and caused enough death, so I do warn him, and surprisingly he makes the connection that I have nothing to gain by warning him after I've obtained the spellbook, and decides to not use the scroll after all. I return to Lazurus Librarus and I am stunned by his selection; I didn't have to keep the scrolls from Ribald at all. I purchase the 9th level spells Imprisonment and Wish, a handy potion case where I can keep potions to free up space in the Bag Of Holding, and scrolls of Invisibility and Improved Haste, as Cespenar had promised me an upgrade to my Cloak Of Protection +2 with them.

I enter the crypts cautiously. They appear more like a dungeon, with heavy wooden-doored cells everywhere. Many are unpickably (to Lhaeozarus at least) locked, nor can I force them. With a death-sigh, a spirit in tattered rags appears and vanishes. Clearly some disturbing things have occurred here in the past. I find a human skull, charred and covered with tooth-marks, in a barrel near where the spirit arose.

Then I encounter a few of the vampires I had heard of. There are only three at first, and I manage to break them apart from the rest of the group. I can easily melee them without incurring much damage though my few remaining Stoneskins disappear quickly. Their Dominations are blocked by the magic resistance and very low saving throws provided by my items, and they fall quickly. Of course, no Amulet Of Seldarine could ever persuade me to remove the Amulet of Power that confers immunity to their Level Drain.

Further on, I encounter the same, ragged Prison Spirit again. It motions with spectral fingers tracing a semicircle around its neck as if seeking a necklace or something similar. Through a secret door, I then encounter quite the challenge: a vampiress by the name of Phlydian and another vampire. She is very strong, highly magic-resistant and regenerates so quickly that if I miss at all, she will go back to Uninjured status. I read a Protection From Undead scroll (I have six of them for just such an occasion) right after she makes her little speech, and both vampires ignore me. I then cast Tenser's Transformation to improve my damage and make my THAC0 low that I can hit her with every strike, switch to the more damaging Staff Of Rhynn, and try to keep up with her endless racing around. A couple of hits of Improved Haste from a Ring of Gaxx gives me enough extra attacks that I am able to take her down eventually, for 19,500 experience points. I notice it has now been one day since I returned to the fray and fury of adventuring, and a very busy one it has been.

Day 2
-----

I now have the necklace and skull pointed out to me by the phantom prisoner. I can't find a body to reattach it to... but I remember that the necklace came from a chest. I place the skull and necklace back into the chest and the spirit once again appears... I then equip a vial of the elven holy water that I bought and apply it to the tomb. The spirit is at last at peace, but before departing this world beckons me to follow (which I do without hesitation; I doubt it would lead me into a trap after the favour I have done for it) and opens one of the doors I was not able to before and vanishes forever. There is a vampire in the cell, but it was probably there before. I kill it easily as my Protection From Undead scroll is still active, and in a container find a Bronze Ioun Stone, which enables me to memorize another 7th level spell. I'm already wearing one that gives me 10% more Hit Points and takes 1 off my THAC0, so I'll just keep this one in the Bag for now.

Nothing is left to do here, so I descend from this area. I pass a fellow Bhaalspawn named Asmay Jahag heading out the way I came in, escaping from Gromnir's soldiers. She warns me that the area beyond is heavily trapped and that some of the traps are proximity-triggered. This does not sound good. I cast Stoneskin to absorb anything that the traps might deliver.

Through the door, a group of dual-wielding human fighters, orc fighters and human thieves aren't very pleased to see me. A Skull Trap in their midst softens them up for later pummeling. The first two I deal with are the thieves, as their backstabs are wasting my Stoneskins. They fall easily to the Staff. Half of the group has lost morale and is running around randomly, so I can concentrate on the remaining ones. They don't last very long; only the thieves even have weapons that can damage me. I accidentally step on a trap that casts Dispel Magic on me and clears off my Stoneskins, I am glad it was not worse.

I cast Summon Hakeashar to get an ally that will trigger traps and be resistant to their magic. Further along the same corridor, I meet a prisoner, and free him. My reputation would increase, except is it at its maximum. I am attacked by more human fighters and a thief, and orcs. I throw another Skull Trap their way to start the process. The thief goes invisible, but I can bring him out of it with Detect Invisiblity. However, he goes invisible several times (and kills my Hakeashar,) so I cast Protection From Magical Weapons and slay him, invulnerable to all of the enemies, who fall in short order.

I free another prisoner, then at the end of the hall is a female mage whose defenses go up immediately; I trigger Spell trap from the Staff Of The Magi. She casts Time Stop, but the Spell Trap is up first. She throws a couple of Symbols at me but my saves are far too low to notice. I use the Staff's lightning bolt/fireball. Remembering the experience with the Spellhold Beholder, I aim carefully. The lightning bolt rebounds several times and completely destroys her Mislead. She casts Finger Of Death; the Spell Trap absorbs it and I get a Summon Hakeashar back, which I use immediately. She destroys the Hakeashar, but while she's wasting her time with it I've Breached off her protections and attack her with the Staff. She must have been weakened very much by the fireball as she is dead on the first hit. I level up to 19.

My new level gives me another high-level ability. I already have so many advanced spells that I doubt I will use them all, so I instead choose to memorize an extra 6th level spell over and above what I should be entitled to. My THAC0 decreases by 1, which is always welcome, I get another Hit Point, and I can memorize another 8th level spell. For the extra 6th level spell, remembering the frustration the thief gave me, I choose True Sight. For the 8th, I choose Symbol: Stun. No point in choosing Symbol: Fear when I would have to chase the fearful, and undead are immune to fear.

I don't rest yet, but I will have to as I am getting low on memorized spells. I continue into an area with several Elite Orcs and Orogs. They are not so "elite" that their weapons can get through the immunities granted me in the Abyss, and they're slow movers who fall to the Sling. There are no traps here on the floor, but a chest with a lightning trap holds a Wand Of Lightning, of course. I Stoneskin before I open it and with that and the Spell Trap active, there are few traps I need fear. The lightning bolt restores a third-level spell to me: Agannazar's Scorcher. I finish off all the Orogs and Orcs. There are two sets of stairs I can take out of here. One leads up, one down to the sewers, not a sweet-smelling place. I decide to take the upper stairs in the hopes that they will lead outside, so that I can sell off what I have collected and rest.

Whoops! A palatial interior wasn't what I expected, nor several of Il Khan's soldiers, including a mage. But I am not about to back down now. My Spell Trap is still active, so I cast Summon Planetar immediately. Planetars are such beautiful creatures, I think as it appears, and here I am using one as battle fodder. Luckily it has high hit points and a strong sword. It gets stunned by Symbol: Stun from the mage, but is magic resistant enough that everything else the mage decides to throw at it bounces right off. Meanwhile I throw my last remaining Skull Trap as far back as I can to avoid injuring it while it absorbs everyone's attacks. The mage casts Sunfire and injures most of his own group. One of the fighters and the archer at the back decide its to leave, and the mage becomes an easy kill with the Staff dispelling his protections. Of the original group, there are only three bodies. I check the basement and find one of the soldiers who fled, and outside the archer and another soldier. They are not fleeing any more, so I don't hesitate to show them the Staff. They are not as well-equipped as the others; their weapons are not magical, or not magical enough. I don't take any damage ridding Faerun of them, but I'm again stuck by one of those annoying fiery bombardments. I return to the interior. An ornate spiral staircase leads upwards, and other than the path into the sewers there is no other way. I imagine that Gromnir Il Khan himself is there, and I wonder what sort of defenses he has. Now that I have a path out, I will find out later.

I return to the Saradush tavern and sell off twenty-three thousand gold pieces worth of scavenged weapons, armour, potions and whatnot, and rest. Then I return to the castle and the second floor, where I know Gromnir lies in wait.

I am not disappointed; Melissan is there with Gromnir, who is a half-orc. He has had her arrested and claims that she is playing Bhaalspawn against Bhaalspawn, and is the source of all of this trouble. But Gromnir Il Khan is mad... yes, mad like a fox and I am now very suspicious of this "Melissan" and her "good intentions." What better way for a Bhaalspawn to eliminate the rest than by the trickery of helping them? I will be very suspicious of this Melissan in future and do whatever I can to avoid assisting her plans. I will also see if she is a Bhaalspawn herself; if she is, there is no further proof required.

I don't have a chance to reason with Gromnir Il Khan and try to convince him that I understand his point of view and am willing to talk. He says that I am an assassin who has come to kill him and attacks me. He has two mages with him, two archers, and two thieves. I cast Symbol: Stun halfway between the two mages and one of them is stunned. I then raise hobgoblins with the Wand Of Monster Summoning to distract everyone else, then a Hakeashar to deal with the uninjured mage and Mordenkainen's Sword, which I immediately send after Gromnir himself as he is a well-armoured fighter dual-wielding flails. The hobgoblins are destroyed with a Death Spell but they have served their purpose. Three of the enemies attack the Sword, which is oblivious to them, while the Hakeashar drains one of the mages down to nothing; his Death Spells are exhausted so he has nothing to get rid of it. Eventually he is whacking it with his Staff. Meanwhile I dispose of the Stunned mage and one of the thieves, then the remaining mage when he has no spells left to cast. Gromnir has high hit-points and many potions of healing and is a powerful fighter, so I Maze him and get rid of the remaining archer and thief to avoid having to deal with all three of them at once as the Sword has unsummoned.

I can relax for short time. I leave a little present for Gromnir Il Khan: a hovering Skull Trap near the point he was Mazed at. I meander about the room slowly, picking up items left behind and trying to remember what they do and are. While I do this, I count off the time elapsed since Il Khan's mazing... four rounds pass (I guess that he wasn't as smart as he thought he was) and a few more, and then a few more... I begin to suspect that this "Hah! Good fun!" is not an attempt to sound modest but is instead a true expression of his intelligence. Eventually he pops back into view and the Skull Trap causes over thirty points of damage to him, and he quaffs yet another potion. He's easy to keep away from with the Boots Of Speed, though he is wearing some mighty fine armour that's hard to get through and must have a very high Dexterity as well. He must have also bought all the healing potions in Saradush. Eventually his morale fails and he evades me. Being much faster than him, and not having to be concerned with defense, I switch to the more damaging Staff Of Rhynn, and he is soon dead. 

Melissan then reappears. Oh, no, another Bhaalspawn is dead and you've shown up just a bit too late to help them! Tsk tsk! I don't think I need any more convincing about her: she is clearly orchestrating this whole ordeal. Concrete evidence may be what I need to show to others, but I am convinced. One of us will be dead at the other's hand by the time this is all over, and I will be doing what I can to make sure it isn't me. She tells me of Yaga Shura, who is a regenerating Fire Giant (which explains why Fire Giants are sacking the town) and how I must go about killing him. That's right: get me to wipe out all the competition for you while you sit back looking "helpful." When she is gone, I check Gromnir's corpse. His armour was +2 Full Plate, and he wielded +3 and +4 Morning Stars. They will sell for a good coin at the Saradush tavern. He was also wearing a helmet that greatly reduced blunt damage, which is why the Staff hardly worked on him. He also dropped another Ioun Stone that gives a benefit to Save Vs. Death and Armour Class, a Rogue Stone, some gold, and an unused Potion Of Extra Healing.

I explore upstairs, and find myself outside on the Saradush ramparts. Soldiers are still fighting and dying, with new ones turning up. Returning to the tavern, I sell off yet more gear and I'm now over 166,000 gold pieces. I don't think I will be worrying about money for a long, long time. I explore Saradush before I leave it, seeing what it has to offer. One of the few places I haven't visited is the home of Countess Santele, but it is empty. When I enter the militia quarters, which looks a lot like the Sea's Bounty tavern in the Athkatla docks, a young man named Mateo is being arrested for the alleged crime of unlocking a magical gate to allow Yaga Shura's army into the town. Countess Santele is there as well. There appear to be three possible suspects in this treachery, and the Captain isn't convinced that Mateo is the guilty man. I indicate that I will see what I can do. I speak to Mateo. He was the friend of Ardic, the son of Countess Santele, for a very long time; he can't understand why she is accusing him and thinks that she may be under some sort of persuasion or duress. He suggests I speak with her directly, which I do.

Countess Santele tells me that her son was kidnapped by the third suspect, a merchant by the name of Kiser Jhaeri, to force her accusation of Mateo. He continues to hold Mateo even afterwards to force her silence. She suggests I speak to Kiser directly, though I fear I will get her son killed if I meddle in this. There seems little choice, however. Kiser's home is close; I check all the rooms carefully upon entering, fearing an ambush, but there is no one there save Kiser and myself, and the story becomes even more complex when I speak to him. He says that a mage named Errard is the real culprit. Errard... Errard... ahh, I remember that he was the one on the ramparts of Saradush when I went upstairs in Gromnir's castle.

I don't leave Kiser's home. I look like I am leaving and he thinks I am gone; instead the Staff's invisibility gets me by him and into his basement, the only place I hadn't searched. While it appears very similar to the ranger Merella's cabin in Imnesvale, two guards are posted in front of the only door other than the one I entered through. Invisible, I open it gently, as if I were a gust of wind, and slip into the room before one of the guards decides to close it. Safely inside and unwatched, to another observer it would appear that a ferret appeared from nowhere and began snuffling up and down the wall. She finds a secret door, exactly where I expected she would. But, it is secured by one of those locks that can neither be Knocked nor picked. I will have to resort to Kiser's plan.

Day 3
-----

I don't resort to this plan. Instead, I tell the mage Errard that I was sent by Kiser to kill him. I am convinced that Kiser is the guilty man and is just trying to hide it beneath a web of lies; there is no excuse for kidnapping and only a coward would do this to save his own skin. Errard divines the location of Ardic, and indeed he is being held within Kiser's home. When I return there, Kiser is no longer upstairs. He confronts me in the basement with his guards, and an orc, and attacks. A quick Skull Trap in their midst and Kiser is already fleeing. I pursue him quickly into the secret passage, closing the door behind... and run right into another mage in the process of casting True Sight to bring me out of invisibility! I duck behind the wall to avoid detection. She awaits just beyond it but is unaware of my location. I throw on the Cloak Of Non-Detection and confront her. Frustrated by my lack of appearance, she casts True Sight again... giving me time to get a good whack in. I score a Critical Hit and she is Near Death already. She manages to get a Mislead off, but is a Nearly Dead clone of her Nearly Dead self and both her and it go down quickly.

I finish off the remaining humans and the orc; the thieves are the most frustrating with their endless popping into invisibility. I can find them by casting a Fireball from the Wand Of Fire in their general direction; they then drink a Potion Of Extra Healing and the healing effect is visible. But they remain invisible and can still backstab me. However, wearing the Boots Of Speed, I find I can frustrate their backstabs by changing direction quickly... my Dexterity is that of a master thief, and before my sacrifice in the Abyss was superhuman, that of a halfling or elven master thief. When a wasted backstab makes the thief apparent to me, I whirl in one quick motion and take the side of his neck with the Staff, and that is enough battle for him. He flees. While he is randomly running about and muttering gibberish, the human fighters are next. I slay one outright and the other and the orc also lose morale for a total of three at once. They are easy kills in this state.

I find one remaining thief upstairs where he fled, and take him down. Kiser, however, eludes me. He finally turns up in the furthest end of the twisting secret passage that parallels the wall of the basement. He goes invisible, I am able to bring him out of it with the same technique I used before, and he's out of potions. Though I later find he wields a +3 short sword, he's dual-wielding it with a dagger so I am confident he won't get a hit on me, and he doesn't; thieves have terrible dual-wielding skills. Among his possessions he drops is a very strange and interesting item: a Shakti figurine. For a short period daily, it can transform me into a hasted, armoured warrior with specialization in his +4 shortsword. I wonder if this will be useful to me...

I don't leave Saradush immediately, but instead sell off unneeded items. I haven't scribed Wish yet, and like Limited Wish, it helps to be wise when casting it, lest a poor wording lead to an unpleasant wish. Temples are places of wisdom, so I buy out the stock of Potions of Insight at the Temple of Waukeen in town, as one never knows when they will come in handy. I also pick up a few Potions Of Genius to help my scribing accuracy.

I return to the Arcana Archives to see what I missed. As I do I remember that Viekang was stranded in Saradush because of his inability to be afraid, so I buy a scroll of Horror, as well as both of the Bigby's Hand spells available. I return to Viekang, and target him with the scroll of Horror. He becomes terrified, but is glad instead of angry, and teleports elsewhere. I received some experience and soon do the same myself, returning to the Abyssal pocket plane.

Cespenar is glad to see me (or is that just what he was created to be?) I remember that he had offered to upgrade my Cloak Of Protection +2 if I found a scroll of Invisibility and Improved Haste, and he does, making a Cloak Of Protection +2 that can cast Improved Invisibility and Improved Haste twice a day on me. He also mentions that he could do something interesting with the Bronze Ioun Stone if I happen to find a Circle Of Netheril.

I change a couple of spells and rest in a dreamless doze. Though the "half-brother" I never knew, whose life I took and returned to him stands with fearsome sword not ten seconds' walk from me, I feel no fear from him, and sleep easily. When I awaken, a delicious meal prepared by Cespenar awaits me; his "recipes" are also of the edible kind. To have worked for Bhaal and not been killed for his "cuteness" he must have some surprising skills, of which he will probably keep many secret, for a butler is also a confidant. As I eat, I glance over my shoulder and catch Sarevok sniffing at the aroma; his mortality has returned to him and with it the pangs of hunger.

I motion with a hand and he joins me. He probably hasn't eaten since his revival, but always the stout-hearted fighting-man, never a complaint would he utter. He eats enough for the two of us, but there is still plenty. And then I see something that I have never seen before and would never imagine to have seen from him: he smiles slightly at the generosity I have shown, before returning to his "post" by one of the magically barred gates to await my return; if I died in points unknown he would stand there forever. I relax for a few moments while Cespenar removes the empty dinner service, and then depart for the North Forest, to find what makes Yaga Shura invulnerable in the hopes of destroying it and him soon afterwards. Before I go I instruct Cespanar to ensure that Sarevok receives the same treatment that I would be entitled to; I have no wish to inflict hunger on anyone.

After the confines of the Abyss and Saradush, it is good to be out in the open wilds, but as noted previously, good things don't last very long for me. I blunder into a group of Yaga Shura's soldiers murdering helpless merchants whose carriage they destroyed. I immediately cast Symbol:Stun at the larger group and stun all but two of the soldiers. Mordenkainen's Sword is next for an indestructible ally. I order the Sword after the ones who were not stunned. I raise Ogres with the Wand of Monster Summoning and set them to work on the ones that were. There are still several more including some archers away from the stunned group, and I am unable to prevent two of the merchants' deaths. Then I find that none of the soldiers can even damage me with the weapons that they carry. I raise a Fireshield and let them surround me. Even when their weapons pass right through me harmlessly, the Fireshield notices and damages them, and they are too stupid to realize that they are killing themselves. Soon they all fall.

One merchant remains, and he is grateful to still be alive. He sells me an Obsidian Ioun Stone. I make my way to the east, across a narrow stepping-stone bridge over a river. Two Fire Giants await me on the other side. They are immense and carry heavy hammers. Instead of tangling with them, I merely backtrack to the halfway mark of the bridge. Fearing water and as dumb as their own hammers, they can attack me with nothing but foul language in their guttural tongue while I riddle them with Sling bullets. Whatever gets the job done... when the first falls, the second makes his retreat.

Across the stepping-stone bridge, several more soldiers await, but they offer little challenge; they aren't as well equipped as Gromnir's lackeys and can't damage me. Beyond them is a wooden bridge with yet more soldiers. A mage is just on the other side of it. The mage Stoneskins, but the Staff takes it away and I Magic Missile him to stop whatever he was planning next. He then casts Shadow Door and becomes invisible. I don't want to waste a True Sight on him as he is obviously not very powerful so throw a Skull Trap where he was last. He dies, and three of the soldiers with him. Further on, yet more soldiers, two more Fire Giants, and two confused Clerics of Talos. I go invisible to consider my options, but strangely, all of them can't see me enough to attack, but know my location and clump around me, seeking me out. I narrowly escape being completely surrounded. The clerics seem only interested in casting Heal, which is frustrating as it takes a long time for a mage to do damage if he doesn't feel like exhausting all his spells at once. And the Talassians are a chaotic bunch: when I lead the two Fire Giants back to the stepping-stones and their hydrophobic doom, the cleric that follows attacks the Fire Giant. I cast Improved Haste from Cespenar's Improved Cloak as I want the Fire Giant kill to be mine: it lasts far longer than that from the Ring Of Gaxx. The cleric goes down next but isn't worth much experience; probably just a healer; strange for a Talassian. The second cleric casts Animate Dead when I encounter him, and then turns on his own skeleton ally. Strange crop of clerics the Talassian faith propagates. Soon cleric, giants, soldiers and skeletons are dead. The mage dropped two Potions Of Superior Healing (which I had not seen on an enemy before this) a Staff Spear +2 and some gems. I hadn't given him a chance to use any of it. The rest have a few minor gems and small amounts of gold.

There is only one cleric left, a female. She doesn't attack me, but instead follows me around, even though she is clearly an enemy. I don't kill except in defense of my life, so I let her live. I notice that I have gained a level; I am now at level 20. I choose an extra 7th level spell as my high-level ability, and put Mordenkainen's Sword in there. For the 6th and 9th level spells I earn from gaining a level, I choose Mislead and Time Stop respectively, then leave for the Forest Of Mir, where a ruined temple to Bhaal stands, where I will find answers.

Day 4
-----

I very nearly don't make it into the temple door... when I arrive, I am confronted by a shade who claims to be Gorion. I don't believe him for a moment and he reveals his true nature as a Master Shade, but his minions, several Vampiric Wraiths, Swamp Horrors, and two Devil Shades are more than a match for me. Immune to my invisibility, they move as fast as I can and are relentless. If not for the Amulet Of Power's provided Level Drain immunity, I would not last a minute. I cast Protection From Magical Weapons to prevent attack while I Breach the leader's Fireshield Blue, but he merely puts up another one. I put up a Stoneskin and consume several healing potions to offset the damage. I then try the tactic of eliminating the Master Shade to see if the rest fall. While magic-resistant, he is vulnerable to fire. I use the column of fire from the Wand Of Fire on him, circling him to cut through his massed shades with the flame, but they are immune to it. I focus on him, dispelling his Fireshield with a hit from the Staff to some degree of hurt, and go to work on him with a hit of Improved Haste from the Ring Of Gaxx. He gets down to Injured before I have to back off. I take him down with the Wand Of Fire, casting Protection From Fire on myself first and targeting him while he is right in front of me to see if his minions are vulnerable to this. He dies and I gain 30,500 experience from it. However, the wraiths and horrors are still relentless. I cast Improved Invisibility to improve my Armour Class, and Blur to improve it more. I am still getting hit. I can get away from the Devil Shades now; they finally can't see me. I separate the Vampiric Wraiths from them and find that they can't hurt me at all. They are easy kills, and the Devil Shades fall to the Staff after I re-Stoneskin and equip the Girdle Of Piercing to improve my Armour Class against their attacks. Only afterwards do I think how much easier a Protection From Undead scroll would have made this! But I had not kept one handy, so was forced to improvise. I will ensure I keep one very accessible for the rest of this temple.

However, I will not be returning just yet. So close of a defeat weighs heavily on me and I should have rested to memorize spells before coming here. The temple has been here for hundreds of years; it will be here in a few hours.

I return to the Abyssal pocket plane and rest, then back to the temple with a full complement of spells, some more healing potions from my Abyssal stash, and a Protection From Undead scroll at the ready... this scroll turns out to be the wisest of the precautions as just inside the door are a Skeleton Cleric, two Skeleton Warriors, two Skeleton Assassins and a Skeleton Mage, like some bony adventuring party lacking only a Skeleton Bard to inspire his comrades with anti-heroic sagas of battle played on his bone xylophone. The Cleric mistakes me a for Bhaal for a moment, but quickly realizes that I am not. I immediately read the Protection From Undead scroll, and they become as harmless as they were before being raised into undeath. I send them back as quickly as I can before the scroll's effects wear off, drinking an Oil Of Speed to double the number of whacks I can deliver. Not wanting to waste the scroll's effect, I tear around looking for more undead to smite, hoping there are no traps about, and find a pack of ghasts and mummies to the east. They last less than a minute.

I can't find traps on my own and Lhaeozarus is becoming woefully inadequate for the job, being stuck with beginner thief abilities. Reaching deep into my pack, I retrieve the Iron Horn Of Valhalla and summon a level 9 warrior for the job. As mentioned before, I don't feel badly about killing him as he just wants to return to Valhalla as quickly as possible, for endless feasting without worrying about gaining weight, while telling the same old dusty war stories for the thousandth time. He wanders around but doesn't set any traps off; there don't appear to be any at all. He does run into a pack of Mummies and Ghasts, and as my Protection From Undead is still making me invisible to them, they all attack him. I grab the Staff Of Rhynn and send them back to the grave. The Scroll wears off as I am meleeing the last Mummy, and I find it can't even damage me.

On this upper level of the temple I encounter a cleric of Bhaal, one who should have died hundreds of years ago, yet does not seem undead like the rest of the denizens of this place. She identifies herself as Nyalee. Yaga-Shura is her adopted son, and his betrayal of her causes her to assist me in my quest. I doubt that she would have otherwise. Yaga-Shura's invulnerability and regeneration is caused by an enchantment that allowed his heart to be kept separate from his body. Nyalee is under the same enchantment, but hasn't used it for any worse purposes than hanging around an old abandoned temple for centuries; yet Yaga-Shura stole her heart (not in the romantic sense; she was his adoptive mother after all) and is keeping it, with his, in the Marching Mountains. He will live while it lasts. Nyalee will destroy it when I return it.

I search the temple carefully, as I find it strange that there is so little in it. Hidden behind a standing floor tile on the lower level at the northeast end I find a gem I have never seen before: a Nymph's Tear, as well a Laeral's Tear necklace and a more common ring. I don't doubt that this nigh-unique item will be useful to Cespenar in one of his "recipes." I depart for the Marching Mountains and whatever dangers that they may hold.

Day 5
-----

Refreshingly, I'm not immediately attacked when I arrive at the right place. I don't doubt it will be long, so explore invisibly. I encounter a strange group of animals in the northeast, including a spellcasting rabbit. Though I am fearful that any rabbit who could cast spells will suddenly leap forward and bite my head off should I annoy it enough, when one of its companions is slain, it zips out of sight so quickly that my eye can barely follow it, and the rest leave as well.

There are three Fire Giants here, and they wield powerful-looking axes. Clumping them, I cast Cone Of Cold on them (as they are naturally immune to fire.) Now they are angry Fire Giants, but they can keep up with the Boots of Speed as I swerve between them and pelt them with Sling bullets. This geography here isn't really conducive to running around, so I raise a Mordenkainen's Sword and put it to work on the Fire Giant who's separated from the rest. Of course, he can't damage it. He loses morale and runs away, and the Sword and I corner him and continue the damage. A good hit from the Sword, and the Fire Giant is chunked... ugh... I am coated in gore and this is not a good day. I resolve to use the Sling to finish them off from now on.

I finish the next Fire Giant completely with the Sling. It takes a long time, and a lot of running, but it is worth it. Continuing up the path I encounter two Burning Men. They look a lot like Fire Elementals, but they are regenerative, and though I raise my Fire Resistance with the Ring Of Fire Resistance and Ring Of Fire Control, they don't get injured easily and I still do. I decide they are not what I seek and therefore not worth the effort, slip into invisibility and enter the structure at the end of the path.

I enter still invisible to most eyes. This is a good thing: I can't believe my own eyes at the number of Fire Giants in here. There must be at least six of them. Two Elite guard the wings and four more the main atrium. I have a second Mordenkainen's Sword memorized. I raise it, and while they pick on it, I Improved Haste myself and start whacking at them with the Staff Of Rhynn. When one becomes angry at me for hitting it, I merely run away, and he goes back to picking on the immune Sword. I carefully check between hits which is the most injured and pick on that one. Before the Improved Haste has worn off, one of the Elite Fire Giants is dead (for twenty-six thousand experience) and two are hurting badly. They are immune to fire, but I have a barely-used Wand Of Lightning in my Bag Of Holding. I careen lighting bolts off the Giants and the walls, and then tear off as they pursue me.

There is a very hot slag pool in the middle of the atrium, and it's painful to even stand near. I notice that some of the Injured giants become Barely Injured chasing me across it. Damn... their fire resistance is so high that fire heals them, and... and that is when I have the insight that lets me know that this will be an easy battle.

I haven't taken off my Ring Of Gaxx since I lost its twin, somewhere between the Abyss and Brynnlaw. Athkatla I think, after I slipped from my usual demeanour, finally able to relax and enjoy myself, in a raucous party paid for the Council where there was entirely too much mead. But such was my desire to return and the Rings were such a part of me that I didn't notice for days, until Brynnlaw. I suppose that there is now an Athkatlan beggar who has grown rich with a circus act of being shot with poison arrows, oblivious to the poison and the wounds of the arrows that close in seconds. I hope that it has found as good a use. But now I remove the remaining one. It has been a long time since I wore the Ring Of Fire Control, and probably as long since the Ring Of Fire Resistance, but now I wear both. My natural fire resistance as one of the Abyssal gifts is 20%, and the rings increase this by 50% and 40% respectively, to 110%. Now I am like the Fire Giants. To become even more so, I cast Resist Fire on myself. My fire resistance goes as high as it possibly can. I stand in the sweltering mass of red-hot rock and metal. The pain is tremendous at first, but soon disappears completely, and the warmth becomes almost pleasant. I feel the energy of the heat rushing into me... healing me. I gain back lost hit points.

I melee the rest of the Fire Giants, occasionally using the Sling, and manoeuvering so that I never face more than one at a time. When one of them hits me (and do they ever hit,) I go back and stand in the fire pit, sucking up its heat and keeping the Giants out of it, where they would heal. When they are all close to death, a couple of hits of the Wand Of Frost and Wand Of Lighting do them in. I could save the wands, but I want to get this over with and finish them. I level up when the second-last one falls. When the last one is dead, I can relax a little. I choose a new high-level ability: an extra 8th level spell. I fill the empty slot with Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting. I don't gain any other spells, even though I have leveled up. I imagine that being at this high level means that new spells will be fewer and further between.

A staircase surrounds this river of lava and I ascend it. A sharp click, and a trap casts a spell at me... I focus my thoughts and its magic careens harmlessly away. I slip again into invisibility and scout the area. There are several more Fire Giants in a chamber to my right. A container sits in another pool of semi-molten rock and metal. To my left is a mirror image of that chamber, with an identical container. When I open the container, a fireball shoots from the wall and engulfs me, but I am still immune to it. The room is suddenly filled with Salamanders and Fire Trolls. I'm curious as to what I have found, so I leave.

One of the items I retrieved from the container is a girdle. It looks interesting; I identify it, and it is a Girdle Of Fire Giant Strength. I've been wearing the Girdle Of Frost Giant Strength for a long time now, and it comes off to be quickly replaced with the new one. Now my strength is 22 while wearing it, and correspondingly my THAC0 is reduced. An amazingly enchanted and powerful two-handed sword was in there too; called the Psion's Blade, it grants immunity to psionics, very handy for fighting Illithid. But this is of no consequence to me as I can't use it. There was also a wardstone, and I find that it fits effortlessly into a hemispherical dome in one of the chambers guarded by the Elite Fire Giants that I slew. There must be an equivalent in the chamber guarded by more Fire Giants, in the container I haven't yet inspected. I find a page of a tome called "Elminster's Ecologies" detailing some of the odd variants of creatures; I don't doubt that I will find several if not all of them nearby, the page's placement being so coincidental.

I notice that one of the magical fields of force that blocked a doorway in the upper are has now vanished. Several creatures are in there: Fell Cats, Salamanders, and a Flaming Skull that looks a lot like Kangaxx did. This one merely casts fireballs and Agannazar's Scorcher rather than endless Imprisonments. I lead those that are fast enough to follow back to the fiery pit by the entrance, and melee them all with the Staff while healing from the heat. I then pick the second wardstone from the container guarded by Fire Giants. Two hideous Bone Fiends appear. They can't injure me, but regenerate and I miss them with most attempts. I cast Tenser's Transformation and never miss again. Once they are down, I run into one of the Fire Trolls.

Unfortunately, it calls for assistance. Suddenly there are Fire Trolls, Fire Giants and Fire Salamanders everywhere. I drink an Oil Of Speed just to stay way from them. I haven't used the Wand Of Cloudkill in a while; I launch one into the middle of the room and skirt the perimeter of the gas, leading them through it. Though many are somewhat magic resistant, they are not resistant enough and take heavy damage trying to catch me.

But I don't want to tangle with the Burning Men. They are beyond difficult, I am out of spells that would help me take them down, and they regenerate quickly. Yaga-Shara must draw his infernal power in such a manner. I avoid the Burning Men and instead concentrate on the other denizens of this hot place. For the next several hours, my life becomes a hell worse than the Abyss; at least there I have a sort of family, clean sheets, good meals and a butler. I get smacked around by an Adamantine Golem; I go stand in the fire. I get slashed and burned half-to-death by a Fire Troll; I stand in the fire some more. The healing is as bad as the hurting but at least I live through it. The worst of all is the Adamantine Golem: like my current state, its fire resistance must be over 100%, and like others of its kind it's incredibly resistant to physical damage. I can plink it with sling bullets and the occasional whack with the Staff for many minutes, then get hit once by it and have to go stand in the fire again, and it will do the same, each lick of flame taking it further from "death," if such a thing happens to golems, and forcing me to redo my handiwork.

Finally I take it down by making sure it doesn't either hit me or wander near the fire pits to heal. I am exhausted by the efforts, and it is only made worse by not being able to think of anything but returning the peacefulness of home, to Brynnlaw. There is very strange type of golem here called a "Magic Golem," composed of pure magical energy. According to the pages of the tome of Elminster, it is invulnerable to magical weapons and spells. By this, it proves to be an easy kill: I simply use the Wand of Monster Summoning to raise allies with normal weaponry. Five Gnolls appear and the Magic Golem is dead within seconds. I doubt anything I encounter further in the place will be as easy with the correct tactics, unless one counts the Clay Golem that tried to follow the Adamantium one's lead, and killed itself by standing in the fire.

With my path clearer and the Burning Men left behind to wonder where I went, I can try to determine my next move. At the farthest end of the complex, a tall stairway stretches upwards, but I cannot climb it. When I use the wardstones I found on a device near its base, it then becomes accessible. I have no idea what I will find up there, I am frightfully tired, and I am running short of spells. I decide I will rest first, lest I encounter something I can't deal with and pay the ultimate price. I also badly need to get rid of excess things that I can't use that I am carrying around. I slip into invisibility and return to the outdoors; I am fearful of using my ability to return to the Abyss inside lest this place be warded and I become shredded by the attempt. The coolness of the air wafts the sticky heat of the place from me and I feel better already. In scant seconds I have returned to my "home" for the time being.

Cespenar does seem to have a use for the Nymph's Tear that I found, but only for a Druidic item. I will have to find the Circle Of Netheril that he speaks of. I carefully organize my things, finding several that I had forgotten to sell off earlier. I decide to keep Gromnir's helmet and the +6 studded leather armour that acts like the Boots Of Speed when worn, for what reason I cannot say, but they seem like artifact items that belong in a museum, not a pawnshop. I return to Saradush and its tavern.

Day 6
-----

First, I unload loose ammunition: twenty Fire Arrows, twenty +2 bolts, twenty Sunstone bullets, ten +1 darts. I decide to keep the Darts Of Wounding; poison can come in very handy against wizards and downed trolls. Next, into the potion case, I retrieve and sell four Potions Of Invulnerability from Fire Giants, ten Potions of Invisibility from thieves, and a red Potion Of Strength from who knows where (it is surprising how much one accumulates by the life I lead.) Next, from the scroll cases, three scrolls of Identify, two of Protection From Energy, one of Sphere Of Chaos and Infravision. From the gem bag, four Star Sapphires, three King's Tears, three Emeralds, three Black Opals, three Horn Corals, two Laeral's Tear necklaces, and several minor gems. Finally, from the Bag Of Holding: two +2 two-handed swords from the Skeleton Warriors, two suits of Full Plate, a +1 two-handed sword, +1 leather armour, a +2 dagger, a +2 short sword, a +1 katana, the +2 Staff Spear from the Yaga-Shura mage who never got a chance to use it, a suit of Elven Chain, and some non-enchanted weapons.

I do have more I could sell, but somehow I can't bring myself to sell the +5 Psion Blade, one of the suits of Full Plate, the Girdle Of Frost Giant Strength, or the Boots Of Etherealness. I have other plans for them... nor can I part with the Bladesinger Chain +4, though the tavernkeeper offers over sixteen thousand gold pieces for them, nor the Staff Of The Woodlands. These are museum pieces, or specimens of high enchantment for acolytes to study and emulate, not trinkets to be haggled over in smoky taverns. My business concluded, I return to Saradush and see if the Temple has anything to offer me. I have close to two hundred thousand gold pieces now. Though the Temple has nothing, I remember the plight of the homeless elves and ask the priestess to take them in, which she agrees to. I return to the Arcana Archives to see if there is anything worthwhile there.

This time I take my time and cautiously check what is available and what I have already. By being careful in my checks, I am able to buy two spells that I still haven't scribed: Animate Dead and Spell Trigger. The latter sounds very interesting; it allows me to choose three spells of 6th level or lower that are cast instantly when I choose. This could prove very useful with Lower Resistance, as it is a spell that usually requires several applications. I haven't used any contingencies, triggers or sequencers until this point, but my travels are taking me to ever more difficult battles and I had best adapt by using what is available to me. My carefulness also prompts me to check the status of my Wands. I dig through the Bag Of Holding and I am stunned what I have been carrying around all of this time: three Wands Of Lightning, two of Frost, two of Cloudkill, two of Fire, one of Absorption and one of Wonder. Several of these are fully charged and I had completely neglected that I had them. I resolve to be more organized in this, and carefully note how charged or discharged they are. I separate the two Monster Summoning, two of the Lightning, and one each of the Frost and Fire for recharging. I sell all of them to Lazarus Librarus for six thousand gold pieces, and he recharges them to maximum capacity; I then buy them back for roughly sixty thousand. Now, finally, I am prepared for what may lie ahead. I also buy out all of his Oils Of Speed, giving me thirteen of them in total in my potion case. I still have a hundred and fifty thousand gold pieces, so I am not wanting for anything; I already have what I need back in Brynnlaw and I will see to it, though it will take a lot of gold to make it into the place I would like it to be.

Strangely, though he sells every type of scroll I have ever seen and many I haven't, I note that he does not carry any scrolls of Protection From Undead, nor were any available at the Temple Of Waukeen. I am glad that I stocked up on these useful scrolls when I was in Athkatla; they seemed almost common there, available from every temple. I still have six of them in my scroll case. I resolve to save them only for dire emergencies, since they don't seem to be available easily. But for the ultimate in rarity, I have only one Protection From Magic scroll. I never found another from the two Ribald sold, and the first allowed me to obtain the Staff Of The Magi that has served me so long and well, and saved my life far more times than I could ever hope to remember.

Wandering the streets of Saradush again, I pass Gromnir's guards' barracks. Their leader is dead, and I am curious what I will find in there. I was not able to force the door previously, but now that I have the Girdle Of Fire Giant Strength, I am successful. There is no one else in the barracks. Aside from a few minor gems, a Potion Of Extra Healing and some gold, I find a key that gives access to the sewers of Saradush, as their grates were previously inaccessible. Wondering what could be down there, and soon regretting that I did, I descend.

There are a few enemies down here, including a mage. He casts many protections when I see him, but a tap with the Staff dispels them. He then casts Protection From Magical Weapons and I can't Breach it off, so I hit him with the Wand Of Lightning and ruin whatever spell he had planned for me. A Duergar with a strong hammer is next; I Stoneskin in case I am hit and take him out with the sling. A couple of Elite Orogs are no more difficult with the Boots Of Speed allowing me to keep my distance. All of this time, Orc Archers have been shooting arrows at me, but being normal arrows, they zip right through me without damage. The archers exhaust their arrows and have to resort to fistfighting. They go down easily with the Staff, and I make level 22 when they fall.

This is a good level-up. I gain a 6th and 9th level spell slot. From my practice at fighting, my THAC0 goes down by 1. My lore increases by 3, and I finally have one hundred hit points, as long as I keep my Ioun Stone in place. For my high-level ability, now that I finally have enough spells to make it worthwhile, I choose Improved Alacrity. This powerful assistant to casting will allow me to cast spells in quick succession without pauses, for difficult battles.

These sewers seem to have been designed by the same architect of the sewers of the Temple district of Athkatla; they seem remarkably similar. Remembering the creatures that lived in the centre of the Athkalta sewers, I seek the centre. There, two Duergar, two Orogs and two Orc Archers are at work, the dwarves hammering away at the walls of the central pit. Suddenly, there are Shadows and Shadow Fiends everywhere, at least fifteen of them, released by the work going on. The workers can't decide whether to attack me or the shades, and they take heavy losses. But I know just the thing for shades, and equip the newly-charged Wand Of Fire. Twice it coughs a Fireball into their midst and the few remaining Shadows are easily disposed of, as are the remaining workers when they decide to attack me.

I next encounter another of those fiendishly fast Shade Devils. I get knocked around a bit by it, but the Staff eventually puts it down. I gulp a Potion Of Extra Healing and the Ring Of Gaxx will take care of the rest. Then I run into two Umber Hulks... quite the variety of monstrosities in this place. My saving throws are low enough that I am not concerned with their Confusions, and by wearing the Girdle Of Bluntness I am able to easily dispatch both of them; I am only hit once. Where Shade Devils are, Shadow Fiends are bound to be, and there are six or seven of them there. They can't touch me at all; they fall without myself taking a scratch of damage. I find another Orc Archer, a Duergar Sapper and an Umber Hulk at the north end of a Sewers. I draw the Orc Archer out and then melee him oblivious to his +1 arrows, which he hardly even tries to use as he is too busy trying to back off from this relentless mage so that he isn't shooting his bow point-blank. The Umber Hulk is next, following the tactic from before, then I use the Sling on the Duergar. I'm amassing quite the collection of +2 hammers and +1 arrows.

Not expecting anyone difficult to remain, I blunder into yet another Yaga-Shura mage with a Duergar Sapper and Orog Elite companion at the southeast down a dead-end. I haven't the spells for this, so I do the one thing I can to get spells back without needing to rest: Spell Trap. I then let the mage unload a few on me to see what I pick up while staying away from the other two. I get a Breach... great. I Breach off his Protection From Magical Weapons and send a fireball their way to break up further spellcasting. To distract the other two, I raise a pack of Gnolls with the Wand and go to work on the mage. By the time he's dead, I also have a Protection From Magical Weapons and a Mordenkainen's Sword back. Surprisingly, the Gnolls kill the Duergar for me; he is not wearing any armour so they hit with almost every strike. The Orog Elite takes only two sling bullets to fall.

I look around to see if I have missed anything, remembering the secrets in the Athkatla sewers and figuring that the same architect may have placed a similar secret here. Indeed, I do find one: a secret door on the northeast wall. I also find a lost Orog Elite who ran away from a previous battle with me; he is near death and falls quickly. Unlike the others, he wielded two +2 short swords. But though the Orog falls before me, the door does not. It won't budge even with my strength of 22, and Lhaeozarus can't pick the lock; I thank her for always doing her best for me and give her a snack while I consider wasting a Knock scroll on this thing.

Eventually I succumb to temptation, and Knock the door open. A blandly rectangular chamber lies beyond, and the chaotic and dissonant screams of... six Mutant Gibberlings? A bit of a letdown, I'd say. Even worse, the inviting stairs up only lead to the passage to Gromnir's castle that I had taken earlier. Ah well.

I search the remainder of the sewers, encountering one more Duergar Sapper and one more Orog Elite. Each falls quickly to the Sling. Well, the Duergar doesn't fall quickly enough, so I hasten the process with the Wand Of Lightning. I leave the sewers of Saradush forever it would seem, and sell off collected items at the tavern: 160 +1 arrows, seven +2 Warhammers, six suits of Studded Leather +2 and Plate Mail, six Composite Long Bows +1 (and I remember that in all the lands of Baldur's Gate, I only ever saw one of these; now I sell six that I picked from the corpses of enemies in a hour or two,) five +2 Battle Axes, two +2 Short Swords, a +1 quarterstaff, a scroll of Identify, and some minor gems. And then I leave Saradush as well, though I may return to sell more items.

I return to the Abyss. The things I decided not to sell go into a chest, and I carefully go over my inventory of spells while I relax and memorize a few new ones. Lhaeozaraus comes out of my pack and scampers around. Cespenar and her lock gazes for a while and I think they are either preparing for a fight, or in love; then I realize he is speaking telepathically to her as I do and no one else could, and I can't hear their conversation. Hmph. A few minutes later he returns with a small bowl and Lhaeozarus munches away contentedly. Another of the myriad abilities of the butler of the gods is revealed. Lhaeozarus curls up in a ball beside me and sleeps when we are done; Cespenar has made her feel at home here, and seeing how relaxed she is I soon drift into sleep myself.

Day 7
-----
Awakening, I check that I have such things as I need, and depart. The talking portal door gives me a few ideas of where I would like to travel to. I can go to Saradush, outside of Saradush (it doesn't elaborate where) or "whence I came." Since Saradush was already mentioned I take the last option and figure I will appear in the Marching Mountains. I instead appear in Saradush, and immediately a fiery bombardment hits me in the head... welcome to Saradush indeed. Bloody portal. I return to the Pocket Plane and this time tell the portal to take me "just outside of Saradush." I appear near the attacked caravans. Amazingly, the merchant I saved previously is still there, and I check if he has anything useful to offer. He doesn't, though it was worth a try, and I walk for twelve hours to the complex of the lair of Yaga-Shura, again bypassing the Burning Men outside, and mounting the high staircase at the far end. Just before I reach its summit, I make sure I have enough wands and potions within easy reach.

A shining and very large hall stands at the top of the stairs, and it is stuffed with Fire Giants. I am invisible to them, of course, so I scout the area looking for any place out of their gaze to make my preparations. There is none. There are, however, a couple of Fell Cat sentinels here who object to my presence, invisible or not. They can't damage me, but they alert the rest. Now the Fire Giants are on the move. Their leader, named Berenn, can cast priest spells. He summons a Fire Elemental. I Magic Missile him to stop his next spell, and raise a few Gnolls with the Wand Of Monster Summoning, fearful that he may have a Death Spell that will remove what I plan next, and that will distract them for a bit. I will eliminate Berenn first, as it is unlikely there are other spellcasting Fire Giants around. Casting Improved Alacrity, I follow it in immediate succession with both Mordenkainen's Swords, then I Haste them and myself, and cast Tenser's Transformation. We go to work on Berenn and he lasts not thirty seconds; curious as to what he dropped I pick it up immediately. Aside from a few very nice gems, he holds a Baalor Claw, probably useful to Cespanar in his "recipes."

I send the Swords into the clump of Fire Giants who happily smash away and do absolutely nothing to them. While they are at work, I hit the whole clump with several discharges from the Wand Of Frost. Two of them are so weakened by the hasted Swords and the repeated hated cold that they fall. I bash away at the remainder with my Improved THAC0. By the time the Swords unsummon, there are only five giants remaining and none of them are in very good shape. When they turn on me, I cast Protection From Magical Weapons, followed by Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting. Another one drops and two lose morale and run away. Keeping away from the ones that are still hostile, I Improved Haste myself with Cespenar's "recipe" cloak and turn the Sling on the fleeing ones, hoping to drop them before they randomly wander into a fire pit and heal themselves. 

By the time the Improved Haste wears off, only two Fire Giants remain, one an Elite. They are still easy to keep away from, though it takes a lot of running around. I find I can reduce the running around when only one remains by going behind one of the braziers on the northeast of the hall. He can't reach me over it. Though there's no place where he can't reach me at all, I can just move backwards or forwards a bit and force him to walk all the way around the brazier again to be in reaching distance, while I plink him with Sling stones. Soon he is down. However, he is not the last of the Fire Giants: the two guarding the door were unable to enter the fray, being stuck there as the main door is closed, and the smaller doors I entered through are not large enough to permit them passage.

I reached level 23 when the last Fire Giant fell. I don't get any more spell slots, but I can choose a high-level spell ability, and go with Energy Blades. I like the sound of Dragon Breath, but it doesn't seem to have any use in this hot place. I will choose it at my next level-up. I gain one hit point and my Lore increases by 3. I check the area; the containers in the fire pits hold only gems (one a King's Tear) and gold. I see no heart of Yaga-Shura or his mother anywhere. Clearly there must be more to this place. I check more carefully. Something is in the brazier at the rear of the hall, the largest one. I check; it is the burning heart of Yaga-Shura.

Two huge doors at the back of the hall are closed but unlocked. They are far too heavy for any ordinary human, but wearing the Girdle Of Fire Giant Strength, I am able to pass them. I am greeted by a rather angry woman, a concubine of Yaga-Shura, though she is only a normal-sized human. I would be angry in this circumstance as well, depending on Yaga-Shura's... preferences. I release her bonds and she tells of Nyalee, who I knew about already, and that Yaga-Shura is obsessed with a huge golden chest in his bedroom, which I didn't. She leaves, still angry, and cursing me should I ever tell of her confinement.

This is Yaga-Shura's domain and I am close to the source of one of the most powerful Bhaalspawn's immortality. I expect that this area will be heavily trapped. I throw on a Spell Trap to catch anything headed my way. Near where the concubine was chained, a hemispherical container halfway up the wall succumbs to Knock (as I finally decided to memorize this;) it yields a page from a book on Stone Golems and a Bag Of Plenty that makes +1 sling bullets. I already have the Sling Of Everard, so I'll just sell this. The trap of the container also casts a spell at me, but I don't know what it was as it gets absorbed by the Spell Trap.

The "chest" is impossible to miss: a vast golden dais rising from the centre of the next room. I waste no time in finding the recessed container in its centre and removing the heart of Nyalee, and a page from Yaga-Shura's journal. Further into the room: three Burning Men. One has a name (Ibix) and casts spells; he calls himself "The Prince Of Fire" and can't be hidden from. The place is also covered in traps, and then they strike I feel the sting of poison though the Ring Of Gaxx saves me from its effects. Well, good on you, Prince. Reign well in your now-empty kingdom. I have everything this horrid place could possibly provide and men who perpetually burn (and stink from it) are creepy to the point of horror and make me nauseous. The Boots Of Speed leave them far behind and I am soon outdoors, heading back to the Temple Of Bhaal and Nyallee.

Day 8
-----

I read Yaga-Shura's journal while stopping to rest briefly on the way. It is deepest night, still hours before sun, when the abandoned Temple Of Bhaal looms into view, a place of blackest intent that makes the night around it seem light in comparison; a thoroughly creepy place at the creepiest time of night. I wonder what sinister rituals took place there in the past, how many innocents were sacrificed to my "father" and what sort of pain that they endured, for what? He died as a mortal and the all the rituals, sacrifices and prayers did nothing.

Nyalee is still awake. I approach her with some hesitation. My Spell Trap is still active and was all the way from Yaga-Shura's domain. I feel that she will turn on me when I have given her back her heart and Yaga-Shura's for their destruction; she has nothing to live for and will probably welcome death when it is something she can have.

She doesn't disappoint me, but the battle that follows does. I don't enjoy killing a mother whose return of her heart gives her the love for her son back, but I have little choice. After completing her ritual, she realizes what she has done in the betrayal of Yaga-Shura and calls forth two Shambling Mounds, a Nymph, and a couple of Spiders. I summon a Planetar and get to work. This place is sick with undead; no matter how many of them I slay there are always more, and several Ghasts and Mummies wander into the battle as well. I distract Nyalee with the Wand Of Monster Summoning and cast Magic Missile on her twice to prevent her casting anything else. I notice she is magic resistant enough that a couple of the missiles are ineffective, so I cast Lower Resistance on her and stay away from the Shambling Mounds while the Planetar deals with the undead and the Gnolls distract Nyalee from me. When enough Gnolls are dead I raise Ogres and set them on the Shambling Mounds. I am unconcerned whether they will damage it, just that they will keep them away from me. A couple of Staff whacks and Nyalee is Near Death, and an Ogre does her in. Now for the undead; a Wand Of Fire fireball damages them all severely. I then try the Staff on the one Shambling Mound remaining (the Planetar must have taken care of the other one) and I have found the first enemy I have ever seen that is immune to blunt damage, and an animated pile of organic material of all things. Nothing goes through organic material like acid, so Melf's Acid Arrow is my next spell, and I plink the Shambling Mound with the Sling while leading it around the temple. For quite a few rounds the acid damages it, and then I hurl a Skull Trap into the midst of the undead horde who follows it. Mummies, ghasts, and Shambling Mound all are struck dead.

I search the remainder of the temple carefully. Aside from a Spell Shield scroll on the body of Nyalee, a spell I didn't have (and didn't miss) there is nothing save the few minor gems and gold dropped by the Ghasts and so forth. I don't leave immediately; for some reason I find the temple intriguing, especially in the dead of night, now that it is finally cleaned out. Gargoyles and devils adorn the parapets, and a mist hangs thickly in the twisted trees beyond, billowing and glinting in the moonlight. The night is alive with sound, but I doubt its emitters are all living; the dead do not sleep easily in this place.

I return to the Abyss, change a few spells, and I do not sleep easily either. Cespenar didn't seem to have any recipes that used the Baalor Claw. The events ahead weigh upon my mind. Yaga-Shura will be certainly a tough opponent, and I awaken several times in trying to drift off to sleep with night terrors of him summoning twenty or thirty Burning Men and then blocking all the exits.

I leave as soon as I awaken. I don't say goodbye to Sarevok or Cespenar; I am too focused and grim. I don't know where the infernal portal will put me if I'm not specific, so I choose the devil I know, and return to the Temple Of Bhaal grounds. I walk sixteen hours to Yaga-Shura's camp resting briefly on the way to ensure that I am not too tired when I get there. I will have eight hours to do whatever I must before I become tired again.

Day 9
-----

When I arrive, innocents are fleeing the wreckage of the invaded Saradush through the camp and Yaga-Shura's soldiers are cutting them down. I return the favour. How could Saradush have been invaded? I cleaned out the sewers... but a section of the outer perimeter has collapsed and the town is in flames. So this is why Yaga-Shura had so many Duergar with strong magical hammers working for him: tunneling under the perimeter wall and collapsing it to let a horde of Fire Giants in.

And just over a long stone bridge, there he is! A giant among giants, his hair and beard are as fiery as a glowing ember and his booming voice quakes the earth when he speaks to me. To imagine that he was indestructible as well... I thought that I would have to search for him, but I have immediately found his camp, for he probably still thinks himself indestructible. Many of his human soldiers are here as well, but they are not my quarry, though they may prove annoying when I deal with Yaga-Shura himself. I throw a Skull Trap at him to start the process and injure his followers. He is amazed that I managed to injure him, amazed enough that he leaves... I don't waste time awaiting his inevitable return. Casting Improved Alacrity, I follow the tactic that worked so well against the other Fire Giants by casting Protection From Magical Weapons to that my casting is not interrupted, then raising two Mordenkainen's Swords and applying Haste to all three of us. Yaga-Shura returns; he has brought reinforcements: a mage, a cleric and several soldiers. More soldiers also arrive from the south, including another Fire Giant.

I send the Swords to deal with Yaga-Shura himself and summon a Planetar to deal with the soldiers, then a Skeleton Warrior. I deal with the reinforcements, first concentrating on the mage. One of the Fire Giants charges me, so I Stoneskin and finish off the mage trying to ignore the elemental fire damage that gets through the Stoneskins from his fearsome hammer. I have to retreat across the bridge to heal and then cast Improved Haste on myself from the cloak. I deal with a couple of soldiers and a cleric there. Meanwhile Yaga-Shura is getting pounded by the Swords and is probably very injured by now. The Skeleton Warrior is gone, and probably the Planetar too, but they have served their purpose. A Fire Giant crosses the bridge after me, and I hit him with the Wand Of Frost, scoot around him and check Yaga-Shura. I lead him over the bridge and hit him with the Wand Of Frost twice. Now he is Badly Injured. Things are progressing well. Now he is... Uninjured? What? Oh, no: I have disregarded one of Yaga-Shura's clerics, thinking he was just another soldier, and he completely healed Yaga-Shura. I am running out of offensive spells, and more soldiers have arrived, including another Fire Giant. All seems lost... I may have to return later.

No; there will be no later. I will finish Yaga-Shura, and I know how to do it. First, I zip past Yaga-Shura and get rid of that annoying cleric with a Wand Of Frost and a goodly tap from the Staff; he was already injured. I then cast Simulacrum. Now there are two Elmonsters, and each holds a Wand Of Frost, the bane of fire-dwelling creatures. Yaga-Shura advances on me but is hit twice with each round by the icy blast, and is already Injured by the time he makes it across the bridge. Several of his allies accompanying him drop from the extreme cold. Mirrored Elmonsters make a semi-circle around him and repeat the process again, and again. Growing steadily weaker, frost in his beard making him look old, by his third attempt to cross the bridge he is about as Near Death as he can be. I cast Chromatic Orb on him. and the mighty Bhaalspawn is finished with a first-level spell; he falls...

... and I am no longer in the clearing near Saradush, in Yaga-Shura's camp. Instead, the Solar who greeted me earlier has returned, to my "home" in the Abyss, where I now stand. Her information before was vague, but I can't say that now... it is revealing, perhaps too much so. I am not prepared for what I see, but I see it nonetheless, and must deal with it as best I can.

If a Solar tells you something, or shows you something, you are supposed to rest assured that it is the truth, and a more absolute truth than it is often possible for a human to deliver, seen from the grander perspective of being an important entity in the cosmos. So it is said. Gorion wrote in the note he left to me in the Candlekeep chest that my mother was his friend and lover, and now  she appears... my mother... the mother I never knew. But she was no friend or lover of Gorion: her name is... was... Alianna, a priestess of Bhaal. I was to be killed shortly after my birth in a ritual to restore Bhaal through blood sacrifice, the same sort of blood sacrifice that Sarevok sought ascension from. My own mother was going to kill me to return Bhaal to power.

My father was an adventurer then, a Harper working towards good ends to keep the Realms safe; this much I know, and he or some far-away essence of him tells me that he and his companions raided the temple and stopped the ritual. Gorion himself killed my mother. Most of the other Bhaalspawn were killed. At least one was not: Sarevok, my "brother." Or is he really my brother? Was he another child of Arianna? Gorion could only save one child; Sarevok was left behind by Gorion, but I was saved. The child Sarevok who appears identifies this... abandonment and subsequent raising by foster parents in the Iron Throne as the source of his resentment and descent into evil.

But as a good thief's trained eye can reveal a deceiving illusion, so can a mage's mind, though the deceit is not overly camouflaged. Arianna, my "mother," of all people would know the years of these occurrences, and especially so as a follower of Bhaal. The Time Of Troubles took the life of my "father" only eleven years ago, and it lasted only three years. I would be at the most fourteen years old if, as my "mother" said, that it was IN the Time Of Troubles that Bhaal whispered to her that she was to bear one of the Children.

A simple word of two letters, spoken, for a moment moves a breath of air and disappears into diffusion and fading human memory. Yet it is there and should not have been; being minor does not change that it was spoken, and this fading human's memory shall seize and preserve it because this fragile breath of air makes all the difference. I disbelieve all of this. My father Gorion did not kill my mother; they are shades all, shades to deceive me and I shall not believe them. The Solar as trickster: now I have finally seen everything. But this Solar could be different. What if an evil Bhaalspawn had triumphed and inherited this domain? She would still be the one to greet him or her and guide them to a possible ascendancy, one that I don't want. So this Solar could be capable of deceit if it had been told to do so, but lying not being in its nature, does a poor job of it.

For the second time, one of the magically barred passages in my Abyssal "home" is opened, and I suddenly realize their meaning: there are five passages, five powerful Bhaalspawn. Each time I defeat one, I will face another challenge in this place. I may also gain another ability, as I gained the ability to return to here at will when the first challenge was completed. When the shades of a past that never was and the Solar are gone, I am returned to the former field of the battle with Yaga-Shura. And who should appear but Melissan, who conveniently, for the second time, arrives just after the battle is over. Also conveniently, she was unable to save Saradush and its Bhaalspawn are all dead, not that they proved any threat to her plans. I am rapidly losing patience with her lies and deceptions, but no matter how rudely I try to break her facade she is determined to keep me on this path. She tells me that I should journey to Amkethran and meet with a "friend" called Balthazar who runs a temple there. So, I will do so, but on my own time. I have nowhere else to go without following her "plans" but I will take my time about it.

Yaga-Shura's armour and weapon are museum-quality works; his hammer is a +4 that provides Level Drain Immunity. I gather a few other minor jewels and items from the bodies, including a +2 mace from the mistaken cleric. The giant's tents still stand; they are the size of houses. An open stone stove, with two whole cattle impaled on a spit and a pot large enough to seat three people, could have a roof put on it and be a comfortable cottage, it is so vast. Other than that I find on the ground, there is nothing else. I return to the Abyss.

I notice upon arriving that I can level-up. I am now level 24, gaining a 7th level spell (for which I choose Mordenkainen's Sword, rapidly becoming a favourite of mine) another hit point and three to my Lore. For my high-level ability, I choose the spell Dragon Breath. It looks devastating, and since I seem to be finished with fire-dwellers for now, it may make a good addition to my spellset. In no hurry to complete Melissan's little "tasks" and unable to return to Saradush, I rest, which will also prepare my spells should I need them in the next challenge I face in the Abyss.

The next challenge would be nigh-impossible without the allies I am able to summon. The Solar's deception has gone from mere words to active threats. I face a group that would have been mine had I been the one "left behind" and Sarevok taken in by Gorion instead. The leader is a version of myself, but a fighter in black armour. His allies are Semaj and Angelo, the mage and fighter/mage allies of Sarevok in the battle that finished Sarevok's campaign, and Tamoko, the fighter/cleric lover of Sarevok (the one, I suspect, that he truly loved. I did not fight her then; instead I convinced her to not throw her life away in futile effort to save Sarevok from the inevitable.) My evil twin uses Greater Whirlwind and I can barely keep away from him. He has enough attacks per round that I had best avoid him completely. His single-minded pursuit of me proves to be his undoing. I employ the technique that worked so well against the Fire Giants: three hasted Mordenkainen's Swords and a Planetar carve his friends to mincemeat while I need do little else but keep away from him; I try to Maze him but he is somewhat magic resistant. I help the process with a couple of Staff taps to Semaj to dispel his protections and immediately have the Planetar cast Insect Plague on him to prevent any future spellcasting.

When the allies of "Elmonster" are dead, I cast Protection From Magical Weapons. His sword slips uselessly through me over and over again, and I can manoeuver the Swords and Planetar into position, walling him in. Substituting a Sword for myself traps him, and he is killed rather messily. Phooey. He was never me in any possible past, present or future; I disbelieve it. My enemies' weapons, armour and bodies disappear... so does the entire challenge area, and this I can't disbelieve: it becomes a mountain oasis, rippled stone under my boots and green large-leafed plants surrounding clear pools. The air becomes suddenly cool and fresh, losing the Abyssal taint of sulfur and death. All of the Mordenkainen's Swords and the Planetar are here too; none have taken so much as a scratch. I am only slightly injured. This is a very pretty place, for the Abyss, and it makes it a little more bearable. The allies start disappearing as I gaze in wonder around this place that appeared from nowhere. Soon, I am alone for now... the water looks invitingly cool. I step slightly into it, and I am healed. My wounds, though slight, vanish instantly. I will rest here from now on; it reminds me greatly of the foyer of the Suldanessellar palace with its large leaves and running water that brought me such peace when I needed it.

But there is one body remaining, that of Tamoko. Any armour that she wore and weapon she wielded are gone. Strange that she remained here when the others disappeared, the one who I had spared before. But she is merely a shade of a past and present that never was. I don't know what happened to the real Tamoko.

I call to Sarevok and he approaches. His eyes are wide with the change wrought to this place, until he sees Tamoko's lifeless body. He recognizes her immediately, and for the second time I see something I never expected from him: the man who butchered hundreds and planned to butcher thousands, whose only goal was a wave of blood to wash over our world, is fighting back tears over a solitary human body. He really did love her... I have found a heart in centre of the stone that once rested in his chest. I calm him somewhat by explaining that I don't think that this is a Tamoko who ever was or would be, but I need to know, and only he can tell the difference, and I ask him to.

He is still hesitant approaching the body, and stoops before it. He removes a gauntlet and touches her shoulder as a father would his newborn child. He turns her slightly. His bright eyes suddenly shine and he snaps upright, and almost knocks me off my feet moving me into position. He thrusts an extended gauntleted finger towards the shoulder he had touched, and explains in his booming baritone that this is NOT Tamoko; she had a crescent-moon birthmark on her right shoulder that is missing. With this evidence, I need not fear the shades of things to come from this point on; they are mere illusions sent to deceive me of the way of things.

But sadness and doubt descends over Sarevok on his pronouncement thereafter; whoever she is, she is similar enough to the real Tamoko, whom Sarevok may never see again, that we will pay her the last respects she never had. Borne respectfully on a bier, Sarevok says his final farewells to his only love, and as the flames of her cremation rise ever higher from the Abyssal fire pit on which the bier was lain, the weight of the years and the losses presses down on him and he can stand no more, and breaks down. I grasp his shoulder to let him know that I stand with him, and can barely restrain myself from joining his wailing anguish.

But as he is doubled over and his eyes averted at the height of his pain I clench my jaw shut with great effort to avoid crying out from the horror of the briefest glance of a crescent-moon birthmark on her right shoulder showing itself through the consuming of her flesh, and vanishing into the inferno, and surely I shall never know the answer to this mystery though it shall haunt me to the end of my days, nor answers to many of the questions of the enigmatic universe we live in.

When it is done, I ask Cespenar to collect the ashes out of our sight in something appropriate; Sarevok swears that he will return to Kara-Tur to bury them with Tamoko's ancestors someday. He says many other things too, but each softer and stranger than the last. I reassure him in gentle tones, while guiding his faltering step to the beautiful mountain oasis that has just been created for me; I throw a backward glance at Cespenar on the way there and know that only a wave of my hand is required for my wishes to be carried out. When our ponderous step finally carries us there a comfortable bed has been prepared, and Sarevok rests, emotionally drained and exhausted. The water of the healing pools is but an arm's length away, and I touch the cool, clear water to my brother's feverish brow in the hopes that it will soothe the pain in his mind as it did the wounds of my body. He sleeps now, blissfully and without terrors. The debt of years is paid.

I depart the Abyss for another oasis, one on the way to Amkethran, but not before ensuring that Cespenar will attend to Sarevok and watch over him well.

Day 10
------

Battle is not always glorious; sometimes it is merely horrible, and sometimes it is better to avoid it altogether. This latter statement I discover firsthand at the Oasis that I pass through on the road to Amkethran. Hundreds of Tethyrian soldiers are camped there: humans and elves, warriors, clerics, archers and mages. Their leader confronts me, and I am stunned to learn that they are all awaiting my passage through this place as they believe me to be the Bhaalspawn responsible for the fall and destruction of Saradush. They will not listen to reason or any explanations. They are simple soldiers who have been employed in this by a sadly mistaken monarchy who believes this to be for the good of the Realms, as I discover in a bounty notice that I pick up from a table while passing through their camp; I will demonstrate this error to the Tethyrians at next opportunity, and it will only further my case that I invisibly passed through their encampment without killing, or even injuring, a single one of their soldiers.

Though they are blind to me, they can still hear my passage and there are many of them. I am surrounded and trapped, unable to push my way through the throng. If I become visible, I will have to kill them to stay alive and escape. I don't want to hurt them, so I give them something else to focus on that is visible to draw them away from me, something non-damaging: I cast Summon Hakeashar. They quickly leave to put the Hakeashar down and I am free to make my escape and continue to Amkethran without stopping, though it is becoming rather hot the further I progress.

Day 11
------

Amkethran is the last outpost of hydrophilic life this side of the very hot desert of Calim and the sun beats down upon it, baking the bricks to dust, the dead to mummies, the skin of its residents to a deep-lined brown. It beats down on a mage who isn't used to this heat and hasn't developed the tan to resist it; he loosens his robe to allow the air to circulate and lacks only a headband holding it in place to appear as do the other denizens, and considers wearing all his fire-resistance protections. When I arrive with my looser-fitting robe sans headband in Amkethran, I am greeted, coldly but not threateningly, by Balthazar. He is the master of the monastic order in a fortified temple there. Though I suspect that Melissan had told him that I was the destroyer of Saradush, he indicates that he will trust me, for now, and shows me two locations I must visit. Our business is concluded for now.

I explore Amkethran, and encounter its mayor. His daughter is about to be executed for stealing bread for the poor by two members of the occupying army, though whose is unsure. She admits to having stolen bread, but I can't watch her put to death for something so trivial. Neither can I interfere violently with the law here, as I am unfamiliar with it and indeed laws are this harsh in some areas. Instead, I pay off the soldiers with four thousand gold pieces. It's a trivial amount considering what I have. Her grateful father repays five hundred of it and gives me part of an enchanted cloak, which was once the property of Montolio, the tutor of Drizzt Do'Urden. It requires a clasp still, but I will keep in case I happen to discover such an object.

The first stop in a new town is always the tavern and inn, and this one is like most of the others, a low and smoky mixture of all levels of Amkethranian folk. When I enter, a nobleman named Marlowe tells me that he is in dire need of help and asks me to meet him at his home nearby for details. I talk to the innkeeper Zakee Rafeh, who is eager to answer my questions and a very knowledgeable man indeed. He knows much of the people of the area and beyond; many weary travelers must call the Zephir Inn home for a night as their first sign of civilization after a long trek through inhospitable desert.

Balthazar, according to him, is a Bhaalspawn. I search my memory wondering whether Melissan told me this already, but it doesn't seem so. Perhaps I was told but did not remember as I was not familiar with his name at the time. He also knows of Melissan and wonders why she is protecting Bhaalspawn. He knows of other names: Sendai, a drow whom Balthazar seems destined to battle, and Abazigal, who seems to be either a dragon or a dragon-fighter; his knowledge is hazy. I sell off quite a few items that I have collected to him as well, but he has nothing worth buying. His stock consists of completely non-magical weapons and armour, a sight I haven't seen since Athkatla.

Returning to Amkethran, I again explore the village, in no hurry. I pause to watch a group of mercenaries practicing. Their trainer summons Umber Hulks and Minotaurs. They are dispatched in a hail of arrows usually before reaching the first of them. When their arrows are exhausted they draw their blades and practice their swordsmanship on the monsters. Then I see someone who leaves a bad feeling wherever he goes: Saemon Havarian. It seems he's involved in the smuggling trade here and is double-crossing as usual. I refuse to help him. Me manages to draw me into it as usual by telling the other smugglers that I have their stolen wares and then leaves. Good riddance to bad rubbish. I take on the mercenaries easily; their swords can't damage me. I immediately sell their armour, swords and helmets to the innkeeper. There is a Temple Of Waukeen not far from here, and I decide to visit there.

In front of the temple, the priest, a dignified and somewhat elderly man, confronts one of the many monks around here and demands to see Balthazar. He speaks of suffering in the village; that everyone is too poor to buy food and that Balthazar is concerned with nothing but building his army. These monks aren't as friendly as others I have known, certainly not the quiet introspective types, and this one decides to battle the old priest. I'm certainly not going to stand around and let this happen, but if I attack the monk, I could ruin whatever small trust Balthazar has in me and forfeit any quests that I may need. I am at a loss what to do, and it seems inevitable that the old man will die before my eyes. His beloved Waukeen will not save him for she could not save herself; she is missing, though temples and even entire towns are still dedicated to her, such as the town of Trademeet, and... and suddenly I know how to save him, from someone I met in Trademeet, and wished that I hadn't.

The monk prepares for battle; his concentration is great as he pushes magical energy through his body, transforming his feet and fists into enchanted weapons powerful enough to shatter stone. I put on the Ring Of Human Influence, as persons of extreme charisma demand attention. The monk prepares to strike.

His concentration is shattered by a tap on the shoulder. "Wow. Are you a real monk?" I ask, trying to sound convincingly stupid. He glares at me with a face clenched as tightly as his fists, but my foolish question seems genuine when bolstered by extreme charisma, so he does not attack me, perhaps thinking the village idiot has stolen a mage robe to shade himself. He says nothing. Now he must prepare again. The priest has finished casting. The monk again faces his quarry. I tap him again.

"What's 'qi'?" I ask him in wide-eyed foolish wonder. The priest's mace bonks him in the head while he is distracted. He yowls and grasps the sore spot with both hands. The priest continues swinging as the monk tries to both dodge the blows and rub his bruised head. The monk prepares for battle once again.

Tap tap... "How come you guys shave your heads?" Bonk.
Tap tap... "Can I be a monk? I heard it's real neat." Bonk.
Tap tap... "How do you kick so high?" Bonk.

After a few more rounds, a Balthazar mage suddenly teleports in, drawn by his companion's suffering. Surveying the situation, he sees an old priest in perfect health, a young, fit monk with bruises all over him, who is moaning and grasping his head, and me, so I still take the blame for all the monk's bruises, though I get nothing more than a warning as this is a "trivial matter" compared to others Balthazar must deal with. The mage teleports his injured companion away and I doubt they will ever get the true story from him. I laugh as I haven't in years, great belly-shaking bouts of pure, unpolluted mirth and temporarily forget my situation. The priest is thankful to have been saved, as he thought he was surely dead. I give him a thousand gold for to aid the starving Amkethranians and he rewards me for my trouble with an oaken ring. It's a druid's item, but it could still find a useful place in my planned museum of enchantments, as Cespenar already indicated that it could be fused with the Nymph's Tear I found earlier.

I visit the temple, and, noting that Illithids had been mentioned earlier, stock up on Potions Of Genius. I buy out all of their Potions Of Superior Healing as well. While searching for a way up to the upper levels of the town and Marlowe's home, I blunder into a cavern, where the smugglers hide. A party of monks is there and they are closing the smugglers' lair. I don't interfere, though I could be persuaded to if the monks became violent, but there is no bloodshed and both monks and smugglers leave quietly. There are several chests at the north end of the cavern and an intricate crane mechanism in the centre, clearly made for the transport of smuggled goods from somewhere below. I imagine that something rather valuable must be hidden in the chests of smugglers, and they must be well-trapped, so as I am due for a rest anyway, I throw the Spell Trap up from the Staff and open what I can, but it is just imagination: there is nothing valuable. There are some nasty traps, including one that shoots repeated bolts at me, but I simply leave the cave to where the bolts cannot follow and drink a healing potion.

I must find a way to the top level of the terraced homes of Amkethran (which makes me homesick for Brynnlaw yet again.) Following the intricate path of the walkways and ladders leads me into a home on the east side of the village, and I am able to navigate the roofs to the summit. I find an interesting shop along that way that sells both weapons and arcana, it seems, so I decide (of course) to see what there is for sale there.

And, who should I find but Lazarus Librarus from Saradush. He has relocated here due to the sacking of the town; I doubt he will get as much business, but at least he lived through it. I find another spell I haven't learned yet (Protection From Electricity) and buy it. It probably won't do me any good, but at least it's there if I need it. His co-proprietor is a gnomish smith named Kerrick, a strange little man who runs a large engine that seems to make armour out of cloth. He expressed interest in the Silver Pantaloons I've been hauling around since Athkatla, still having not found a use for them. He seems to want me to find a Bronze pair. Other than this, he has nothing to offer me. He also mentioned a Gold pair... Gold, Silver and Bronze...

I invert the Bag Of Holding. I've never done this before, and a small mountain of items falls out and piles up to my waist with a loud crash. I dig through the items: a Cloak Of The Stars, a Wand Of Wonder, three sets of vampire stakes, several Illithid Control Circlets, and midway through the pile are the Golden Pantaloons from the fop nobleman who mistook me for his laundry service in the Friendly Arm Inn. They have served me well on the few occasions I wanted to appear fashionable without looking overly wizardly; the last time I wore them was the Council fete at which I overimbibed. I return all the items back to the Bag and place the Golden and Silver Pantaloons in last. I don't doubt I will be returning here, though as Kerrick is an armourer I'll probably end up with another useless item, but it may end up in my museum if it is good enough, and I am curious as to what it might be.

Marlowe greets me as I enter his home; he has been expecting me. He tells me that his daughter Malla, who lies near death, has been pursued by a lich named Vangoethe, who stole her soul as she is a virgin and he required it for some arcane ritual or rite he was planning. Vongoethe haunts the cave where the Amkethranians bury their dead. He will tell the monk guarding it to lower the wards to permit me entry. I travel to the cave and the monk does allow me entry. I step through into the dark coolness of the cave, heavy with the must of decay, but not before I equip a Protection From Undead scroll in an easily accessible place.

A circular platform inlaid with the stone calendar of an extinct culture dominates the cavern. Around the walls on raised platforms lie the tombs of the dead. Four tables also occupy the platform. I turn one, and the lich Vangoethe appears. Unlike other liches, he is willing to speak instead of merely fighting anyone who crosses his path, and speak he does. Marlowe signed a pact with the lich for twenty years of wealth and success in return for his soul at the end of this time, but slipped up in his end of the bargain, so the lich took his wife instead and the cowardly Marlowe fled with his daughter. Now, he uses his daughter's life as a shield against the consequences of his infernal bargain.

I return to Marlowe's home to see if this is the truth. Is it? Indeed, that it is. He accompanies me to the lich's domain at my insistence that others stop paying his debt. The lich will return Malla's soul to me; I can keep it or return it to her. Marlowe asks that I return it as a final favour to him and I agree. He is instantly slain and the lich vanishes whence it came. I feel no remorse; Marlowe should have known better than to make foolish bargains with liches and his wife's life was lost because of it.

Outwardly, the gem in my hand resembles a Star Sapphire, but the lich has performed a Soul Trap on this particular one and the essence of Malla is somewhere in there. If I wore it as an Ioun Stone it would raise my Constitution and Dexterity, undoing the effects of the Abyssal test and making me naturally regenerative. But just by knowing that it is the wrong thing to do, I find I am unable to use it. It is Malla's soul and I have given my word to her dying father, a man who undid his past mistakes and faced his destruction quite bravely.

I return the trapped soul to Malla and she awakens. I do the right thing for her, giving her five thousand gold pieces to get started on a life of her own and we depart her former residence. I am curious about those crypts in the cave of the dead, and the lich is gone, so I return there. Rickety ladders ascend to the vertical coffins. I climb one carefully. Opening the coffin yields... a trap. My Spell Trap is active so it won't be fatal though it may hurt a bit. The coffin is empty and it looks like a tunnel leads into it. I step through...

...and I immediately appear just outside another coffin on a different platform. This is a strange place. I open the coffin on that platform, another trap goes off, and I am on a third platform. Eventually I am on a platform with a coffin I can't open. I can't force it either. I cast Knock, and it fails too. I will need a key to get inside it.

I return to the raised podium and twist another of the four tables, as one had made Vangeothe appears. Four Greater Fire Elementals appear. I don't take a scratch disposing of them all, though it takes a long time with the Sling. I merely lead them to the crypts and ascend the ladder. They can't climb it and mill about the base while I pick them off. When I descend the ladder, I slip and fall to the ground. I black out briefly, but am uninjured when I arise.

The next table yields four Fission Slimes. I only ever met one of these before, in the dungeons of Durlag's Tower, but I remember that if they are not killed with fire, they multiply. I turn the fire column of the Wand Of Fire on them, and walk so that it cuts through them all. Another hit and a Fireball and they are all gone. From the next two tables come two Ice Golems, which I have never seen before, and four Greater Air Elementals. I use the same technique on them that worked so well on the Greater Fire Elementals, and the only damage I suffer is from falling off the ladder yet again.

Though it seems that things were being unlocked and disarmed with the last turn of the tables, the locked casket still eludes me. There is nothing more to do in this cavern, it seems, so I will have to wait. I visit the ex-smuggler's lair again to see if what I had done in the caverns has changed anything there; it has not. Time to continue with the grim business at hand, made grimmer by the priest of Waukeen, who confirms that Sendai is a Drow Bhaalspawn and Abazigal fearsome, though to what degree I am not sure. I return to the tavern and rest, so that I may awaken and depart in the early morning before dawn's first rays smite the land.

Day 12
------
Amidst a dense and foreboding forest I walk, and encounter a lonely woodsman. I am close to Sendai's lair and the woodsman tells me of a group of "dark elves" to the west; is this the only person in the Realms that hasn't heard of the Drow? Wrecked wagon pieces are scattered about, and several sets of remains. While I ponder where the Drow may be, my question is suddenly answered as I am ambushed by several Drow warriors and wizards, and Elder Umber Hulks. One of them, the Hive Mother, is a Beholder! I quickly run for the north to draw the faster Drow away and put on the Cloak Of Mirroring that I haven't worn for months.

I stop dead in my tracks; this isn't the Cloak Of Mirroring. I must have grabbed the wrong cloak, but which cloak? I never had a cloak that did this. I put it back on again and the Drow approach me. I am encased in a sinewy ball of writhing magical energy exactly as if I cast Spell Trap. At that moment a spell from the Hive Mother strikes me, but the sphere absorbs it. It doesn't reflect it back, but I am unharmed. At least it's working. I throw a Skull Trap south, and three of the Drow take damage from it.

I only have to raise one Mordenkainen's Sword to deal with the Drow, and they all attack it while I bash them. I briefly interrupt this to raise a Hakeashar to deal with the wizard. When it drains her spells, I return to bashing. By the time the Sword is gone only two Drow are left and they are easy to keep away from and use the Sling on. They drop a few nice swords and magical crossbows. Next, I lead the Elder Umber Hulks into the open area and Sling them to death as well. Only the Hive Mother remains. I send the Hakeashar ahead and prepare to do what I must, but she slays it with a Death Spell. Sigh... I reach Level 25; I can pick another 8th level spell, gain another hit point and three Lore.

I am ambushed by another Drow group returning the way I came to scout for a better approach to the Hive Mother: it is led by the "lonely woodsman." I raise a few Ogres to deal with the mage, then another Mordenkainen's Sword. There's an Efreeti following me around as well, but if I wear the Cloak Of Mirroring its spells can't affect me much and its weapon is useless against me. I take the mage down with True Sight to dispel her invisibility, Breach to get rid of her protections and the Staff to dispel what remains. Then I can finish the rest of them, concentrating on whatever one is injured. However, though I think a Planetar would be helpful I can't raise one: all my 9th levels spells are gone, though I haven't cast a single one. This was probably due to the Beholder. I will have to rest soon. I also have a lot of goods I could sell.

But where I will rest, I don't want the Hive Mother suddenly visiting. I must finish her. I put on the oddly different Cloak Of Mirroring and confront her. I immediately raise allies with the Wand Of Monster Summoning; I can cast no spells when the Anti-Magic Ray takes effect and it dispels all of my protections. As well as the standard Beholder fare, she has a complement of wizard spells such as Chain Lightning, Magic Missile, and Stoneskin... and Maze... eaagh. As she is a Beholder, magic is innate to her and she never runs out of spells. I use more hits of the Wand Of Monster Summoning than I ever have before in one battle, as I must stay close to her to dispel her Stoneskins with the Staff Of The Magi lest she be undamagable, and I don't want to get Mazed. When she has killed most of the allies, I raise some more. We gradually wear her down, and she is dead in the first try. I pant and pant and miss Brynnlaw when the long battle is over.

The "woodsman" is dead, so I explore his cabin. It is empty; a few minor treasures and some magical weapons and armour are in the chests and upright cabinet. Lhaeozarus doesn't find any traps, so I chance it and Knock and force them.  A fire burns merrily in the open stove, the beds are clean and neatly made; it looks like home, one of many that I have inherited through killing the occupants. The life of a child of the Lord Of Murder is like that, even with good intentions. I am suddenly overcome with tiredness, and I pull the door closed behind me to keep out whatever denizens of the night can be found in this area, collapse into bed and rest until mid-morning.

Day 13
------
I awaken refreshed and ready for the challenges ahead. I step confidently into the entrance of Sendai's lair, made visible by the death of her guardians the night before. A Disintegrate trap trips, but I am immune to this with my saving throws being what they are. I enter. There are many enemies here: Myconids, Spore Colonies that generate more of them, Umber Hulks, Mutated Spiders and a Sword Spider. The first three are especially vulnerable to Cloudkill and one hit from the wand finishes all of them I can see. A few more lurk deeper in the cave and fall to a second hit, dying before they are able to cross the gas to reach me.

Further along, yet more Umber Hulks, Sword Spiders, Mutated Spiders and a Wraith Spider await. All but one of each Spider fall to another Cloudkill; they are Staffed into oblivion. I stand before a long, gleaming bridge, high above a chasm. It is adorned in strictly Drow fashion, and I wager that it is coated with traps. I would have lost my wager; there are no traps but instead a group of Mutated Spiders. They move very quickly and attack madly fast. A Fireball in their midst kills two outright and puts two Near Death. I Staff the two near-dead ones and try to keep away from the others. The Girdle Of Piercing is very helpful against their attacks.

There are two possible paths here. On one of them is an upright container that I can't open, nor can I enter the door nearby. The other just has a door. I have no choice but to enter there. Approximately a dozen Drow are inside and they aren't pleased to see me at all. Unfortunately I badly overdo it with three hasted Mordenkainen's Swords and the Improved Haste from the cloak for myself, thinking that this is the battle with Sendai. The Swords carve the Drow to mincemeat; each lasts no longer than a few seconds against the trio of killing machines. When all of them are dead, I collect their magical weaponry and mutter to myself, wondering what I will do next. One of them dropped the key to the other areas I couldn't get to before this. But a whisper of conversation, perhaps carried by the ventilation of the place that brings fresh air from above, strikes my ear: Sendai it seems was meeting with a monk, probably of Balthazar's temple, and they will do battle eventually.

The vertical "container" I couldn't open before turns out to be a door. The passage beyond looks bleak. I will try the other one. I regret it. There are many more of those horrid Mutated Spiders with their fast attacks, low THAC0 and relentless speed, and I take a lot of damage disposing of them. I end up using the Wand Of Fire and throwing a Skull trap into the mass of them just to dispose of them as quickly as possible. There are other spiders here too: several Sword Spiders, a Phase Spider or two and a spider with a name (though I can't recall it) who is very hard to hit, protected by Spell Turning and casts Heal on herself when injured, so she takes a long time to kill. None of these other spiders can damage me, though. I make level 26 in this area, but get nothing for it but three Lore and one hit point.

Another bridge looms before me, and the other end of it is packed with Drow Warriors. I don't have any good spells, Drow being magic resistant, and I foolishly used all the Swords I could raise. I take out whom I can with a Skull Trap and a few Wand Of Fire hits while dodging them. Then I raise a Fireshield, cast Protection From Magical Weapons and let them surround me. Even when their weapons zip right through me, the Fireshield damages them. One of the Umber Hulks and another Drow drops dead. But I am almost out of good spells, a few more Drow arrive to join them, and I still haven't faced Sendai.

So I slip into invisibility and leave, muttering all the way back about my foolishness at not saving my spells. What if the Drow trackers follow me? Silly wizard I am. I not only close the cabin door, I lock and ward it from the inside. Then, I change a few spells, getting rid of Resist Fear for another Melf's Acid Arrow, and most significantly getting rid of Shapechange for Dragon Breath.

Day 14
------
I awaken just after midnight, though I would prefer it were still light out with the Drow about; they don't like the daylight. I return to the cave, and the fray therein. A single Mordenkainen's Sword takes out five of the Drow with my assistance, and the remainder are easily dealt with, though slowly, with the Sling. Their +3 bolts hurt but they don't have a lot of them, and waste them on a group of Dire Wolves I raise with the Wand Of Monster Summoning. I've hardly gotten used to being level 26 when I make level 27, gaining a 9th level spell slot in addition to three Lore points and another hit point.

It looks like a lich "lives" here; Orduvall seems to be his name, but liches are liches so I may be a bit hazy in the recollection. I haven't fought a lich in a while, but I haven't forgotten how to. I throw a Spell Trap up even before I enter his domain. When I see him, I immediately hit the Wand Of Monster Summoning (I really get a lot of use out of that wand.) The lich will inevitably cast Time Stop and waste several of his best spells on the worthless monsters, and that is just what he does. When they are dead, I raise a Hakeashar as he's wasted his Death Spell so can't get rid of it, and sit back to watch the fun as the frustrated lich heals the Hakeashar with every attempt to harm it. The Hakeashar lasts the duration; it disappears when the lich has exhausted his repertoire down to first and second level spells. He has just enough to make my Spell Trap go away, and then he is drained and as vulnerable as he can be; shambling skeletons are rather easy to keep away from. I weaken him a bit with the Sling and then smash him down with the Staff. He gives 22,000 experience and drops three interesting items: a Drow Wardstone, a named heart called the Heart Of The Damned, and a gem called the Eye Of Tyr that I remember could be used to complement the holy sword Carsomyr. I also plucked a Skull Of The Lich item from a container in his area while killing time while the Hakeashar was working on him; I don't know what this is for.

I almost miss another area, which is entered near a large machine that looks like a Spelljammer, and it's packed with Derro Berserker dwarves. There are about twenty of them and each of them goes into a Berserk state when they see me. It is a large open cavern, so I don't have any trouble keeping away from them. I want to save my spells for Sendai and her troupe, and the Berserkers won't be magic resistant, so I use the Wand Of Fire on them several times when they are all bunched together chasing me. Several of them go even more berserk and attack their fellow dwarves. I bash a few with the Staff, plink a few with the Sling, and eventually they are all dead. I level up yet again to level 28, and earn a 7th level spell slot, another hit point and 3 Lore. I fill my Bag Of Holding with their gear and the things I found before and return to the cabin to dump the items in a chest.

I stumble around the underground complex for a while, lost in the unfamiliar surroundings, before progressing. I enter what seems to be the heart of it. A drow priestess recognizes me, but she is not Sendai. She teleports away and challenges me to pass. In a small adjoining room, there are Greater Earth Elementals. There isn't enough room here for manoeuvering, so I lead them out one at a time, wear the Girdle Of Bluntness and Stoneskin, and melee them both handily, though it takes a while for them to go down. The next resident in there is an Earth Elemental Prince named Ogremach. Yikes! He is not only very fast and very strong, but also casts Stoneskin on himself and dispels mine with a touch! I take a couple of nasty knocks. But I live. He doesn't. I only have one Mordenkainen's Sword left, so I will have to rest again. You know, journal, what I will be putting in that 7th level slot when I incant before resting... Mordenkainen's Sword has served me better than just about any other spell. I raise that one remaining Sword and Haste both of us. With myself dispelling his Stoneskins with the Staff as fast as he can raise them, and the Sword soaking up all his damage and being none the worse for it, he dies easily, for 56,000 experience.

I need to rest, but I also know that there are yet more enemies just around the corner, and they won't include Sendai; she would have much larger quarters. The Demon Knight, Abishai, Hive Mother Beholder, Vampire and Drow priestess Diaytha are the enemies. I put on the Cloak Of Mirroring and try to get off as many spells as possible before the Anti-Magic Ray will inevitably make this impossible, so cast Improved Alacrity. I immediately Disintegrate the vampire (and luckily it works; Maze would have been next if it failed) then cast Dragon Breath in the middle of the room. The Hive Mother and Diaytha are stunned and the latter is severely injured. I summon a Planetar and have it cast Insect Plague at the Hive Mother, and drop two Magic Missiles on her while she is down. The Planetar gets to work on the Demon Knight and Abishai and slays one outright with its vorpal blade. Meanwhile I dispel the Hive Mother's protections and get to work on her, rasing Dire Wolves with the Wand Of Monster Summoning to keep her distracted. The Planetar has killed both the demonic creatures but is terribly injured in the process, so I cast the Mass Cure ability I picked up in the Pocket Plane and heal both of us. While it Flamestrikes the Hive Mother I deal Daiytha the death-blow with the Staff, and the Hive Mother falls soon afterwards to our melee attacks, still concentrating most of its efforts uselessly on the Dire Wolves.

I check the area carefully afterwards. Daiytha dropped a nice shield; too bad I can't use it. But my work here is done for now. I return to the cabin, again unload a pile of items into the waiting chest there and rest. I like this home-away-from-home, though it lacks the service of the Abyss. I ensure that I pick a new 9th level spell since I can; I haven't tried Energy Blades yet, so I think that I will do so.

Day 15
------
I awaken, and return to the lair and the point at which I decided that I could go no further, just before ascending to what I think may be the final lair of Sendai... but of course it isn't. Instead, a Drow Captain called Captain Egeissag confronts me, and the Spectator beholder that I met in the Underdark is there as well. Egeissag has been sent by Sendai to stop me, and challenges me to a one-on-one pit fight. I accept the challenge if it means I will be able to progress in the search for Sendai.

I have no trouble with him at all. I cast Stoneskin and raise a Fireshield after he uses his Greater Whirlwind; he basically kills himself with his nine or more attacks per round when he hits me through the Fireshield. He quickly exhausts my Stoneskins so Protection From Magical Weapons is next and he can't exhaust that; it lasts the four-round duration, but he does not. When he is dead, the geas the Spectator Beholder placed on the remaining Drow as the result of our wager slays every one of them. I yammer for a bit with the Spectator; he certainly is an intriguing Beholder. Many of them are as intelligent, just not as friendly as this one. Here would be an interesting traveling companion: a creature whose magic never needed to be memorized or scribed. I could show him how to learn new spells, and he could show me how to cast mine more often. But he has his path to follow and I mine, and he must make his way separately. I wish him well and he is gone.

Sendai, as Drow often do, is working with the Illithid. I immediately recognize the familiar garish design when I pass into the area adjoining where the challenge took place, and almost as immediately drink a Potion Of Genius. There is also an Umber Hulk here, so on goes the Girdle Of Bluntness and I Stoneskin to avoid too much damage; I get drained only once while disposing of both of them. A recessed container here contains a vial of pure mercury metal, and I wonder what Cespenar could do with the shimmering liquid. I don't inspect it further as mercury causes neurological damage, just the kind of thing a mage would like to avoid.

In two tiny adjoining chambers, little larger than closets, are Vampiric Illithid. They regenerate quickly, so quickly that any damage I cause is gone by the time my next strike comes. I would have to cast several spells to bring it down, and they do not seem to be important creatures, so I leave them alone and continue on. There are several more Illithid in the next circular chamber and an Umber Hulk. I get drained twice by the Illithid but then only have to keep away from them until it goes back up by five points. I get two critical hits on the Umber Hulk and it is dead, removing the fastest threat. I return to the other Illithid and try not to engage them more than one at a time; several hits in a row would be instantly fatal.

These Illithid are smarter than the ones in the Underdark; they heal themselves when injured but aren't magic resistant to it as the others were. The Ularthid does so, but it doesn't help it much and by concentrating on just that one and keeping away when I am hit until the effect wears off, he is soon down, and the last of the group has a name: Mithykyl. This must be the leader of them, the one directly in league with Sendai. But though Mithykyl in name he is not mythical in abilities and soon, when I finally can catch him after his morale fails, joins his fellow Illithid in wherever they go after death, perhaps some garish and silent Valhalla with fresh brain always on the table and all the talk and laughter taking place over telepathy.

A large wooden door now stands before me, and I am sure I have reached the final step. Sendai awaits within. I am rested and have a full complement of spells, so press on. Indeed she is there. She has prepared a little "surprise" for me, and around the seven radial platforms of the circular chamber she summons seven statues, seven clones of herself; she then vanishes and the first statue comes to life. It begins casting priest spells. I could unload spells on it, but I hesitate: there are six more Sendais to deal with after this one; I can't do anything to the statues before this "Sendai" is dead. I will have to conserve my spells, as I will be dealing with the real Sendai after this. So rather than going all-out, I simply hit the Wand Of Monster Summoning (yet again) to raise some disposable friends for "her" to waste spells on. Some Gnolls appear and she hits them with Insect Plague. A few continue to attack her regardless. But I find that her armour class is ridiculously low; I can't hit her with the Sling except on Criticals, and need to roll 15 or better to hit her with the Staff, even with a Strength of 22. When the Gnolls are gone I raise Dire Wolves to distract her and slowly wear her down... the effort is maddening and I would love to cast something but know that it could cost me my life in the long-term, and then the bloody bitch statue heals itself completely when it is Near Death and I have to start again. Luckily it is completely out of spells. When it gets Near Death again it starts to heal itself; finally I can stand no more and Magic Missile does it in.

Immediately another "Sendai" arises from a statue. This one is a mage instead of a priest. I don't need to alter what I do much; the Wand Of Monster Summoning again raises allies. Two Drow warriors accompany the statue Sendai as well. It casts Time Stop and then Gate. I am far enough away that the Pit Fiend turns on "Sendai" instead of me; the foolish statue didn't cast Protection From Evil first. It wastes most of its spells getting rid of the Pit Fiend, for which the Drow join in. I pelt them with sling bullets while they do this. When "Sendai" is out of spells I keep her and the Drow away from me and bring them down with the Sling. It's a long process, but I don't get injured by it. Knowing that another "Sendai" will arise when this one is slain, I make sure that she is the last to fall so that there are no other enemies to worry about in addition to whatever may appear. Two Sendais down, and five to go.

The third has a Drow mage and warrior companion, and is a dual-wielding thief. She goes invisible many times, so I decide that True Sight is the way to go regardless of future considerations; those backstabs could hurt and I am out of Stoneskins. The mage knows hardly any spells and a hit from the Wand Of Monster Summoning is enough to take her limited abilities out. This "Sendai" tries to go invisible to backstab me several times; I just run around and change direction frequently until True Sight kicks in and dispels the illusion. As I did before, I make sure to take "Sendai" out last. Three are down, with four to go.

The next "Sendai" also has a weak Drow mage and warrior along, so the same tactic works perfectly. This "Sendai" is a dual-wielding fighter, easy to keep away from. Five are down, two to go.

"Sendai" six is an archer, who wields a strong bow with +3 arrows it would seem. Ouch. It also has the complement of Drow warriors. The Wand Of Monster Summoning again distracts it from me while I deal with the Warriors.

Number seven is also a thief; and the Wand Of Monster Summoning prevents it from backstabbing me by distracting it with monsters. I also cast True Sight when it is weakened so that it lasts the remainder of the battle. It continues to try to go invisible but the True Sight brings it back into visibility seconds later before I am backstabbed. Number seven, the last statue, dies...

The real Sendai appears in the centre of the chamber at the point she vanished from. She doesn't get much of a chance to be angry; this is the moment I have been struggling through all the other battles for. She is attacked by four Hasted Mordenkainen's Swords, a Planetar and an Elmonster that dispels her protections and casts Breach to bring down her Protection From Magical Weapons. She can't drink potions fast enough to deal with the barrage, can't cast any spells while getting terribly beaten, and is mincemeat within twenty seconds. As she dies, she reaffirms her faith that the prophecy will continue to happen regardless of my influence; I haven't felt as good killing almost anyone as I did finally getting rid of her, but still when I look down at her Drow form with the breath leaving her body for the last time, I wonder if Solaufein is alive and well...

As I expected would happen, now that another Bhaalspawn is dead, I reappear in the Pocket Plane and the Solar greets me. I am treated to a counsel with myself, another illusion of the Solar, and I am told that my purpose is to prevent the occurrence of the Prophecy, that I am not destined to be one of the Bhaalspawn who cause the return of Bhaal. The prophecy will come to pass if I fail, and only I can stop it. Well, this much was obvious to me from the start: all the other Bhaalspawn I have met were either completely powerless to do anything or working diligently as part of the prophecy to fulfill it. At one point the Solar asks me why I am doing this, and although I expect a snappy answer, I open my mouth to speak but no words emerge. Why indeed. I would much rather be at home; I miss Brynnlaw with every fibre of my being and I have a life to lead there, a life that does not include very much of clambering around smelly holes in the ground and meeting things best left to bad dreams. But what if I did? What if I just packed up and went home? Could I live with myself after that? Would any of it mean anything when my "father" returned and smote the land? Would Brynnlaw be excused because of distance? No, nothing would be. And so I decide, and tell the Solar that I am doing this because it is the right thing to do, and not only for myself. I could not live in comfort knowing that others suffered and died for my inaction. And so it shall be, and I am transported from the Abyss.

There is a Bhaalspawn, or so I suspect, that I really don't want to see right now, and happily, I don't. When I return to Sendai's chamber after the brief Abyssal respite, Melissan does not suddenly arrive and say something to the effect of: Oh gee, another Bhaalspawn dead, and after all her hard work too. Neither does she arrive when I emerge, finally, into the outdoors and seek the shelter of the cozy cabin. I should like it if she never appeared anywhere again, but I remember that I still have to deal with Abazigal before receiving any further lies and schemes from her, so I probably will be spared having to look at her until then. Not that she's terribly unattractive; I wouldn't throw her out of bed but something tells me I'll end up having to throw her out of the Prime Material.

But first, there is much to do. Schools of magic and museums of enchanted items don't build themselves, you know. I've had just enough of prophecies and death and gods and cosmic hoodoo for a couple of days. I haven't had enough of quiet, walking in the tranquil wilderness, good food, and a soft bed: things that make me happy. In the coziness of the cabin, a soothing fire melts the pain and death away, and I carefully arrange the items I found in the lair of Sendai. There are quite a few of them, and this will take several trips.

And so I walk, south to Amkethran to be sure, but instead of the expected heat, the night has come, and a cool breeze makes the walk a pleasure. Eight hours after departure I arrive and seek the tavern and the friendly innkeeper. We get right down to business, and I sell: fifty +2 Katanas from the Drow warriors, thirty-two suits of Elven chain Mail +1 from them as well, three +3 Longswords, two suits of +3 Leather Armour, two suits of +1 Leather Armour, a suit of plain Elven Chain Mail, a +3 Shortsword, a +3 Dagger, and that old Cloak Of The Stars I've hardly ever used. I went in with just over one hundred and seventy five thousand gold; I now have a hundred thousand more, and there will be yet more...

The I return to the Abyss and see what Cespenar has to offer. With the Oaken Ring and Nymphs' Tear, he fashions a druidic ring. Though it costs five thousand gold to make, it is a museum-quality artifact, though perhaps I will end up donating it to a worthy druid I meet. Cernd was one such; he was a friendly and sociable sort, who gave Druidism a good name with his contagious enthusiasm for the natural world. I could summon him to here and present it to him if I wanted, but my life is not for a druid to share: a druid needs a forest to tend, clean water and air, not smelly dungeons and strange magics. So do I at times. Perhaps I will see him again someday when all of this is over. And the holy avenger Carsomyr neatly holds the Eye Of Tyr applied to it by Cespenar, which makes it a +6 enchantment weapon, surely still one of the most powerful I have ever seen even with the one I have encountered recently. Perhaps I will meet a worthy paladin to bestow it upon, though I am not so sure about the ones I have met so far; it may just end up in my museum.

But I do see Sarevok. He looks fit, well-fed, well rested... and happy. He has changed. Whatever possession he was under for these years is gone, and we can be brothers, albeit in a way far removed from others; the last family either of us has. I don't remain in the Abyss long, but do stay long enough to relax and enjoy a dinner prepared for Sarevok and I by Cespenar, and I find it amazing that can we talk about things that took place before, and stranger, laugh about them, as though they happened to different people. When Sarevok is resting after dinner, I unload a few more items into the containers here, and then depart for the cabin to retrieve more saleable items.

Day 16
------
I fill my Bag Of Holding and the remainder of my pack with saleable items and return to Amkethran. I sell one hundred and ten +3 bolts, forty +3 arrows, sixteen +3 Heavy Crossbows, thirteen more suits of +1 Elven Chain Mail, nine +2 Shortswords, eight Potions Of Invisibility, six assorted low-level scrolls, two +2 Battle Axes, two Potions Of Invulnerability, two Potions Of Fire Giant Strength, a Potion Of Master Thievery, a Potion Of Perception, and some minor gems. Now I have three hundred and thirty seven thousand gold pieces. Where do innkeepers get the kind of money to buy all of these items? Wherever it may be, I certainly don't question the good fortune of them having it. I return to the cabin for the last time to pick up the items I left behind.

Day 17
------
I don't go directly to the lair of Abazigal, but stop in Amkethran to sell off the last of the items (that are worth the trip.) I get rid of twenty-five Antidote potions and some minor gems. I rest, and I am off for the lair of Abazigal.

It is twelve hours' distance from Amkethran. The land slopes upward the closer I approach, until it is hilly, bleak desert tor, baked by the sun and its sands stripped to bare rock by the incessant howling winds. The lair of Abazigal is an ominous structure and I feel that little good will come of being here, but I press on. A tremendously large foyer lies at the entrance, with wide stone steps like those in front of a courthouse ascending to it. Its flooring is an intricate weave of patterns, and colonnades flank the sides. Truly an impressive place... who or what could possibly dwell here?

There is only one person here and he is not pleased to see me. He identifies himself as Draconis, and, as I did with Gromnir, I have a twinge of familiarity on hearing this name. He is the son of Abazigal, and although he at first thinks that I have been sent by the monks of Balthazar, he realizes that I am a Bhaalspawn as is his father. He goes hostile. Although unarmed, he is a mage of some worth. He casts Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting at me and summons a few Invisible Stalkers. They can't touch me, but the Wilting does. Ouch! I raise a few Ogres from the Wand, heal myself and cast True Sight to get rid of his illusions. To raise an ally that can damage him but is resistant to his magic, I cast Animate Dead and a Skeleton Warrior appears. Draconis' further Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wiltings do nothing to the Skeleton Warrior, and he dies quickly...

...or at least, he decides that appearing as a human is not getting him anywhere, so reverts to his true form as a Brown Dragon. With wings? With wings. However, I have dealt with Dragons before. He has cast Protection From Magical Weapons and who knows what else, so I raise a few monsters with the Wand Of Monster Summoning, and get to work. I raise a single Mordenkainen's Sword to hold him off, and get it close to him. Then I start with Lower Resistances, two of them. His Wing Buffet knocks me back but I don't fall unconscious and return to the second casting, making sure the Sword is close to him. When they are cast, another Mordenkainen's Sword so that I am not left exposed if the first one is slain. Meanwhile, he has raised more Invisible Stalkers than I thought the Plane Of Air could hold. Good thing they can't damage me.

But things begin to go awry: this dragon doesn't play by the rulebook. The first thing I notice is that the Mordenkainen's Swords can't damage Draconis: he is immune to slashing damage. A dragon immune to slashing damage is a thing I haven't heard of before. I am still confident I can use magic to defeat him. The second thing that goes awry is that he can become invisible, and non-detectable, seemingly at will. I remember that this is something that Brown Dragons were capable of, but I've already cast True Sight before this. While invisible he raises a few more Invisible Stalkers. I stand between the two Swords. I have to stop his spellcasting somehow. I summon a Planatar; I wasn't planning on using up all the best spells so early I needn't cast True Sight via the Planetar as Draconis is back. When Draconis reappears, the Planetar casts Insect Plague on him. As he's picking on the Swords, I unload Greater Malison on him, as his magic resistance is nearly gone. It passes and his saving throws are lowered.

But again, things go awry as Draconis is not playing by the rulebook. When I cast Finger Of Death, he fails his saving throw and I expect that the battle is over. His glowing lifeforce escapes his body... and nothing happens! He's still alive. I am becoming very frustrated and decide I don't care what he's carrying; I just want him out of the way. I cast Disintegrate. He fails his saving throw again. A small pile of Draconis dust appears and settles to the ground... and nothing happens again! He is still Barely Injured and I am running out of ways to injure him. He must have a Death Ward active, but he didn't ever cast it.

I raise another now-useless Sword just to keep him busy, and start unloading all the damage spells I have on him: Abi-Dalzim's, Magic Missile, Skull Traps. While I am at it, the Planetar does the same thing. We get him down to Badly Injured when I am nearly out of spells. He heals himself completely. My Planetar vanishes. Lower Resistance expires and his resistance returns to normal.

I am completely screwed. I'm not running away... no. I will face him as best as I can and when the history of the Sword Coast is written... I... probably won't be in it at all. I cast Stoneskin, Tenser's Transformation, drink an Oil Of Speed, and prepare for the inevitable. I grip the Staff and clench my teeth, rush headlong into the battle. I bash away at Draconis hoping to at least injure him. I do; not enough. I run away a bit, heal, and return. I throw a few Monsters in the mix.

I don't even get a chance to approach Draconis a second time. A shower of acid engulfs me. I am instantly blinded, which is a good thing as I really wouldn't want to see myself dissolving. Though I had thought it would be painful, the acid kills all the nerve endings after only a few seconds of stinging; I have already gone into severe shock and all my body can do for me now is flood itself with painkillers to make the end bearable. I know I will not survive this. I fall on my side to avoid crushing Lhaeozarus. I search my mind for our telepathic link and break it forever... she resists, finally showing some emotion; did it have to come to this? I shout at her in my mind to let it break.. let it go I command you and run! and with the quickly fading link between us, the last vision I have, I see the darkness inside my pack give way to a scuttling across the tiles and then a new darkness as she has found safety inside a crevasse somewhere... she is safe and the link between us is gone. I see no more, as my eyes dissolve into clear fluid and run out of my skull, and my flesh liquifies, sloughing off of me in semi-solid, hissing, steaming chunks borne on a river of blood, then even the bones soften and begin to liquify and I am no more than a puddle of mush. But this is long after I have lost consciousness into a dreamworld where my father Gorion beckons me to join him in a place of light and nature and magic... is this Elysium, or Arcadia, or merely the hallucinations of a dying mind, enraptured on its own painkillers... ?

...and with a jolt to my senses time unwinds itself, smashing me into another reality as a wave smashes flotsam into rocky breakwaters, and I am back again in the lair of Abazigal, and Draconis is here, casting True Sight to try to bring me into the world of the visible. I have somehow returned to just before the battle. This has happened a few times before to me, such as when I fought the Twisted Rune in Athkatla and found my Protection From Magic scroll was faulty. So you won't play by the rulebook, eh Drac? We'll see about that. I leave and don't look back. As soon as I am clear of the roof of the foyer, I warp back to the Abyss. I slam down my spellbook and rip the remnants of an uncast 9th level spell from my mind, and memorize a new one. I am muttering to myself again and shaking with anger, and when I turn around I find I have an audience: Cespenar and Sarevok are eyeing me inquisitively, not really knowing what to think that I seem to be losing my usual coolheaded demeanour. I tell them not to worry; it's nothing they did and that I will soon be over it, just having a bad day. They look at each other briefly and seem satisfied by this. Sarevok has already died three times (that I know of) so I think he would understand.

I rest fitfully, and awaken unrefreshed. I leave immediately.

Day 18
------
I arrive back at in front of the wide stone steps of Abazigal's realm. I don't hesitate or prepare myself. I enter as if I owned the place, and I might as well soon. I cast a single spell: Shapechange, the 9th level spell I had memorized in place of Dragon Breath. Dragon indeed... when the casting is complete I assume the form of a Mind Flayer, an Illithid. I approach Draconis in human form; he is so intent on his casting he does not react to an Illithid attacking him. I could be Bhaal himself and he would just stand there. I don't attack him with any weapons but those the Illithid are born with. Being just an unarmoured human at the time, I don't have any trouble sinking pointed tentacles into him. When I do, some of his intelligence, about as much in difference between a somewhat bright person and a genius, disappears.

Three more hits later, only a few seconds, and he is dead. He doesn't change forms either. I don't get any experience for killing him, but I really didn't kill him. I simply drained his intelligence to the point where it would have been negative. As it is impossible for a living being to have a negative intelligence, the universe itself stepped in and negated Draconis' existence, preventing him from doing anything further. As I watch, though, he shapeshifts even in death, and I shapeshift in life, regaining my normal form. His head becomes that of a dragon, and I find I can pick it up, like a trophy. I do so, and bear it to the wide arched entryway at the far end of the ornate foyer, chuckling slightly to myself.

Down a narrow passage, a human calls out to protect Abazigal from my reaching him, and several Lesser Earth Elementals and the Greater Werewyvern that was the guardian human attack me. I immediately raise a single Mordenkainen's Sword for them to focus on. While the Werewyvern pummels it, I find that its regenerative powers are truly insane. It will go from Injured through Barely Injured to Uninjured in scant seconds, perhaps four. So, having saved my spells I am able to do to it what I had planned for Draconis, casting two Lower Resistances, then Greater Malison, and doing it in with a Finger Of Death. I send the Sword after the massed Lesser Earth Elementals and pound them with the Wand Of Fire while they uselessly attack it. As the Sword is completely immune to fire it doesn't notice. I finish the rest of them with the Staff, and make level 30. I gain nothing for this but three Lore and one hit point.

There are several pools in this cavern, and as underground pools are, they are fed by a spring. I peer into them and can make out that they extend downwards. In one of them, a glow can be clearly seen at the other end. I don't know why I do this, but I jump into the water and swim to the other end. I am only slightly underground here; roots project through the roof of this cavern and it looks very similar, with the pool at one end, to the secret room I found in the Sea's Bounty tavern in the Docks of Athkatla. Five Frost Salamaders guard this grotto, but they are slow movers, though I must be careful to stay away from the long-reaching spears they wield. I hit them with a couple of Fireballs and Sling them down. When only two are left the fire column from the Wand does them both in. There is a passage beyond this grotto, and I take it.

I find myself in a well-furnished room, totally cut off from the rest of the world by the narrow tunnel and the water. I would discount this as madness were I not confident I was not mad. Two hideous Bone Fiends are here. Isn't anyone ever pleased to see me? They can't damage me at all; I raise a Skeleton Warrior to help me take them down, as its THAC0 is low and it has a magical weapon; the Bone Fiends are very hard to hit and also regenerate. The irony of summoning one skeleton to get rid of another is not lost on me. I found a flask on the corpse of the Greater Werewyvern, and I fill it at the spring pool here, leave and swim back through the passage to whence I came from.

There are four pools, each with a passage from them. I've already taken one, and two would not be wise as they are very deep, and I would not be able to make it to the other end without air. Two large pointed-arch doors to the north and east can't be opened by be either. One is trapped with a Finger Of Death trap, but I am only mildly injured by it. I have only one possible path, so I dive into the one pool I can reach the other and of that I haven't been in yet. I swim towards the beckoning light at the other end, as in the stories I have heard from those have died and been raised.

I emerge into the realm of those awful Kuo-Toans that I can't stand, there are many of them here, but I don't take a scratch in disposing of them. I raise a Mordenkainen's Sword for them to deal with. They are lined up in the passage to the chamber I am in trying to get to me, and the one at the back is a priest. So I turn the fire column from the Wand Of Fire on him and it cuts through the line amassed to try to get through to me. Every one of them is injured by it, and I Magic Missile the priest to prevent his next spell. I bash the remainder with the Staff and send the Sword ahead. In a second chamber, two draconian but transparent heads arise, and these are Greater Water Elementals. They lob fast-moving and very damaging water attacks, but the Sword is invulnerable. I raise another one. I remember that Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting affects water and plant creatures more strongly than others, so move the Swords out of the way and cast it between the two Greater Water Elementals and a Kuo-Toa Captain whom I've disregarded until this point, and the Elementals are damaged enough that they die shortly thereafter.

The next chamber holds two more of the Greater Water Elementals, and I find that if I Stoneskin, it nicely absorbs their damaging water attack should they happen to focus on me. They fall quickly. Two more of them reside in the chamber to the west of this, but there is something different here: an Olhydra. Though it looks like a Water Elemental, it is a deep violet colour and has what appears to be a Blue Fireshield up. It doesn't seem to do much. The Sword and I dispose of the two Water Elementals, and the Sword then attacks the Olhydra on its own. It gets stunned, though I had through nothing could stun a Mordenkainen's Sword, and the Olhydra begins pounding on it. So, I need only keep far away from it; opponents foolish enough to approach it I see would meet a very sorry end. It's very hard to hit with the Sling, but after a rather long and boring battle I take it down for 27,000 experience points without injury. When it dies, it completely vanishes. However, it doesn't drop anything that I require, and I suddenly feel badly knowing that it was harmless if one merely stayed away from it and I could have left it alone; it was a rare creature, albeit a malign one.

There is only one more circular chamber in this area, and a lone Kuo-Toa Whip guards it. I dispose of it easily, and the first human being I have seen in quite a while is here, imprisoned. I force the cell door open and speak with him. He is a monk of Balthazar's temple, and he has been here for quite some time, probably being tortured. He is in horrible condition. He gives me a rope that I can use to navigate the longer tunnels that he hid within the folds of his robes. He is trembling as he hands it to me; he is barely alive. He also speaks of a dragon that guards Abazigal's sanctum, and that it is under a geas to serve Abazigal. A scroll to reverse the geas was stolen from him, and can probably be found somewhere in this place. He dies, having maintained his existence only by force of will and inability to abandon his mission.

When I return to the central chamber from whence all pools lead, it is through one of the large doors, which is now opened as it was only locked from one side. The contents of the flask allow me to breathe underwater and the rope given to me by the sadly dead monk will allow my return. A strange method of conveyance for a mage, but I will adapt as required.

The cavern I emerge into is much larger than I expected. Its floor is covered with sharp stalagmites and one end is dominated by a Dragon named Fll'Yissetat, clearly the one I been warned of. But she makes no move to interfere with me, saying only that I must "bow before Abazigal" in a mindless repetition. A sad fate for any dragon. There are several pools here, but they all seem to lead to the same area, except one...

...and this is a strange area indeed: a twisting, crenelated cavern with hovering eyes bobbing up and down. Resembling the Wizard Eye spell, they are everywhere. But I am invisible when I explore and though they are many eyes, none can see me. There are several types: Eagle Eyes, Sentinels, Vigilants, Seekers and Observers. Some are hostile, some neutral. There are also three petrified adventurers here. I found a couple of Stone To Flesh scrolls in the place already, and I already had one. I will make sure to clean out the enemies here before I use them to restore the adventurers.

I finally find an area with only one eye in it, and start it off with a good whack from the Staff. An Eagle Eye it is, and its rate of fire of electrified bolts and darts is impressive. But I am Stoneskinned and it absorbs all the damage. I raise a few Ogres as a distraction and move on to another Eye. I turn the fire column on it; they don't have many hit points thankfully. The Sentinel eyes cast Monster Summoning III many times, but the monsters that appear can't damage me. A Fireball or two and monsters and eye are dead. There is large clump of them all bunched together in a corner at one point; a Skull Trap followed by a Fireball slays all of them and I can deal with the rest individually.

There are only two eyes left here, but they aren't hostile. Still, they have to go. When I whack one, a mage appears by the name of Iycanth The Mad. Rather, the eyes summon him. He wonders why I am messing around with his "friends" and would like me to find a lost eyestalk for further assistance. Noting that this may be beneath me, he suggests that I subcontract this to the petrified adventurers, and Iycanth and eyes vanish.

I equip a Stone To Flesh scroll and read it while focusing on the one who appears to be a halfling thief. Though these scrolls usually only restore one creature, all of them are brought back to life. They are indeed young and inexperienced adventurers, but I'll try not to shatter their hopes. Their names are Nanoc The Barbarian (a human barbarian,) Tim Goldenhand (an elven mage) and Bondari (a halfling thief) but I am not sure of his last name as he changes it when explaining how he got here. I give them the quest to retrieve the eyestalk, telling them that it is a vital quest for the good of millions, and they are off. I wait confidently for their return. I was a young man myself once, and enthusiasm can overcome the shortcomings of inexperience, sometimes.

Day 19
------
I await the return of the three adventurers with the promised eyestalk. This was a difficult mission, so I will be patient. I scrounge up some food for Lhaeozarus and myself and relax, but I don't sleep just yet.

Day 20
------
Still awaiting. This place isn't that bad since the eyes were cleared out, and there's clean water in the pools. I freshen up and give Lhaeozarus a bath; she needs it. I dig through my pack and catch up on my reading with some books there. This should pass the time well.

Day 21
------
What could be taking them so much time? I hope they haven't died down there, or I will be stuck here forever waiting. I could always just leave for a short time, but I know with the way luck works that they'll arrive with the eyestalk just after I step out for a brief respite and end up keeping it and leaving. I'll have to stay here. I've finished my reading, and it wasn't very exciting reading, so I don't feel like reading it again.

Day 22
------
This is really getting boring. I need something to do. I try to recall cantrips from my early days; at my current level I can manipulate them very easily. One I'm successful with causes small objects to float, so Lhaeozarus takes flying lessons. She likes it very much. Yes, the Flying Ferret of Abazigal's Lair will strike terror into the hearts of.. um... crackers and beetles. Agh... I need this to end. Where are they? I am running out of food, and Lhaeozarus is NOT for consumption. She will fare well, as she can hunt for small edibles practically anywhere. I may end up asking her to find enough mice and beetles to feed both of us. Ugh.

Day 23
------
I'm getting desperate. They still haven't even popped by to let me know they are still alive. I haven't slept enough in five days to have memorized any spells or be refreshed. I'm getting groggy. If there wasn't sufficient fresh water I would definitely be dead by now. Please, please let this end...

Day 24
------
Just as I am contemplating leaving and forever giving up this life, regardless of the consequences to myself and the Realms, they are back, fresh-faced, beaming and talking quietly amongst themselves. I am so glad to see them. What could they be saying? Hey, just one moment...

Full of youthful enthusiasm and poor judgement, they figure that the high-level mage must be holding a lot of treasure, so decide to attack me. Without even trying to, I turn into the Slayer and do what Slayers do. I don't lose any reputation because this was not a voluntary act. It probably happened because I am so tired that I am starting to hallucinate. For example, I see Lhaeozarus hovering nearby; ferrets don't fly. Oh, wait; I did that. I should let her down.

But just as my grogginess becomes unbearable, I am snapped back in time in the same manner I was in the battle with Draconis. Yet, I wasn't dead. Ahhh, I understand: one of these adventurers has the same power, probably the thief Bondari as this seems to be the leader. Now the three adventurers appear again, but this time they decide that attacking me is not a wise decision, and instead give me the eyestalk I was expecting, and something I was not expecting, but wanting very much: the Bronze Pantalettes, a set of metallic undergarments that I've been wanting very badly to find so that I can finally resolve what the other two pairs are for. I tell the young adventurers that they are heroes and they seem happy; perhaps they won't make the same mistake next time. Off they go for more adventures and I smile watching their exuberance over their Magic Missile and Identify and remember how I was as a young acolyte when I cast my first Magic Missile, my first real spell, and my tiredness is becoming unbearable; I need to sit down and...

...and my grogginess and lapsing consciousness leads me to a vision of the past and I am no longer in a dungeon but in the clean and well-kept laboratory of Obe the Illusionist in Candlekeep... I'm so excited! This isn't a cantrip, this isn't a practice... I've just learned my first real spell! I'm hopping up and down with excitement. It took me two days and I keep hummin' the words to myself in my head so I don't forget them 'cause this magical language is really strange but I think I understand it. Dad says I got a "knack" for it and told Obe that and whispered some stuff to him... musta been about me! He was studying a scroll one night and I read it over his shoulder and all the words just came together 'cause I'd learned how to read them from the books but the books aren't magic; they're different on the scroll where they're real magic. He says almost no one can do that without someone showing them and a lot of practice and I could be a mage like him. So I saved up wages from chores for weeks and bought a scroll from Firebead and promised and didn't cross my fingers that I'd be real careful and not do bad stuff with it and make sure to get a real spellbook and use that "knack" and not like waste it casting it off the scroll 'cause I might not get another one. Got an old robe from dad's drawer with a tear on the sleeve but it's still a real mage robe and I just turned fifteen three days ago but I learned a real spell already! I did! I'm really gonna cast it! I'm gonna be a mage just like you someday Dad and I'm gonna adventure like you did and do great things! Maybe someday cast the big spells and meet Elminster and stuff!

And he just smiles in that peaceful, all-knowing smile that he has and quietly reassures me: son, you just relax when whatever it is appears and you remember that little rhyme you've been humming. And magic comes from the heart too, not just the mind. You feel those words inside and you'll cast that spell alright. Obe's hands wave in the air and he incants something far too advanced for me right now. Suddenly there is a flash of light at the far end of the laboratory and a screaming blue animal appears. I've been told that these aren't real so they don't feel pain, just appear to. So I do what Dad told me. I ignore the gibberling. I ignore everything. I reach down into myself (dad said it was like diving into water) and something feels like the spell is just at the level where my neck joins my head... it's there. I don't say anything because this spell's words are all inside, which is why so many mages start with it. I grasp it and those words suddenly MEAN something: with every syllable the feeling at the back of my neck grows stronger, more focused like the marching of soldiers to a drumbeat, and this tension is building in my mind like a thunderbolt about to strike, prickling the hairs at the back of my neck and making me breathe more deeply; I would discover an analog to this sensation years later when I "discovered" the other half of the species. And at the last syllable, the overpressured boiler of my mind can't contain the sensation, the energy, anymore... it must go somewhere! Where? Instinctively my forefinger points, my eyes lock onto the blue conjured being. With a hiss and a smell of scorched air as after a thunderstorm, a blinding little sphere of energy appears at the end of my finger as a noticeable, but not unpleasant, tingly electrical sensation travels through my arm. When the energy has left my mind the tiny sphere leaps directly where my eye took it; the connection was made. When it strikes, the sphere explodes to five times its former size, and the gibberling is struck dead. I yippee and jump in the air and Obe claps, and I look at my father and smile, but he is silent and his eyes are misted over having seen how I am following in his long-strided footsteps.

I pull myself slowly off the cold stone of the cavern floor, having fallen asleep briefly, and pat the dust from my robes; my eyes are somewhat damp with tears. I miss you, Dad, Gorion, wherever you are... if you knew how much, and how much of you I have become. I hope you know... and I miss someone else too. Someone I never got to know in Candlekeep but who always was friendly to me. Someone I considered a nuisance but who should have been a friend. But youth, as I have seen firsthand with those shiny newly-minted adventurers, makes foolish decisions thought beneficial. Theirs was attacking me...

Mine was falling under the influence of Ulraunt, the Keeper Of The Tomes. A young mage, seeing the power that he held within this most sacred and knowledgeable of places, would be tempted to hold him in the esteem he never earned through other than his occupation of a position. A man with the combined knowledge of all the world at his beck and call, who was exposed daily to the secrets of the ages that most men never see in a lifetime. But I was not wise enough to know that Ulraunt was even less wise. A cold, haughty and heartless prig, he sucked the fire and life out of everything and everyone he knew. But his denial and betrayal of me on my return to Candlekeep forced my reconsideration of this man and the emulation of him, and led me, through avenues of the friends and contacts I still had left there and elsewhere to find out what Ulraunt was really like: a part-time worshipper of Cyric, he was scant steps away from a descent into utter evil, and only his nefarious political power-cravings and manipulations kept him in the post which Tethtoril, a far wiser, gentler, better liked, more learned and all-around better man, should have occupied. So, in retrospect, I thank him deeply for revealing his true nature to me, so that a better nature of myself could emerge over time, though old habits do die hard.

And like a bolt from the clear blue sky, I am possessed by an idea that Ulraunt was not merely an annoyance... that his involvement went far deeper and to a far more malevolent degree. How did two bumbling assassins, Shank and Carbos, enter Candlekeep? They could not even afford armour or magical weapons, never mind a tome of five thousand gold or greater value. They would not have survived the catacombs for a minute. They must have been allowed in regardless, but only Ulraunt of anyone in Candlekeep could tell the Keeper Of The Portal to ignore his unswayable orders and allow entrance to anyone who did not fulfill the requirement. What were the odds of Sarevok's arrival just as we were leaving? Gorion would have told as few as possible. Why did we leave the security of Candlekeep? Gorion would not be specific, but to consider that Candlekeep was less secure to him than the dangerous wilds means that he knew that the real danger was within. And again I think of Cyric, who Ulraunt was being seduced by... the greatest enemy of Bhaal and his children, Cyric who lusts for the Bhaal essence. I silently vow: with whatever power I have at my disposal and whatever influence I may hold when this task is finished, Ulrant will not remain as the Keeper Of The Tomes. It is time for him to step aside and fade into the obscurity he deserves, and I will ensure that he does.

And now, finished with recollections of my past and having paid my respects, in my heart, to the only father I could ever want or need, I am off to finally resolve this enigma of the pantaloons. I will put Abazigal and everything else on hold for now. I am hardly tired now as my mind is seething with the possibilities of what it is that I might end up with. As I am leaving I notice a secret door to the north. I can't open it nor Knock it; I will note it for later. I swim back through the tunnels and the water further awakens me. I am deeply worried that Abazigal has locked down my way out of here as he did the ways into lair, but the way I entered is clear to me, and I am able to leave his lair behind and make my way back to Amkethran.

Day 25
------
I leave confidently and quickly, but the tiredness begins to catch back up to me the closer I get, until as Amkethran looms on the horizon, I can barely put one foot ahead of the other and have to concentrate to do so. I look at my feet to walk, trip over a desiccated root and sprawl in the dust, prop myself back up with the Staff, and continue on.

Finally I arrive after seeming endless hours, in Kerrick the Smith's shop. He is amazed and delighted by the components being present in one place. I am prepared to pay an astonishing sum of coin to resolve this mystery, but he doesn't charge me a single gold piece, doing it simply for the ability to do it, and leaving right away to return to his Gnomish fellows and tell them he was successful.

What did he make for me? Five items: first, a huge suit of armour he called the Big Metal Unit. I tap it and it is clearly tougher than Adamantite. I don't know if a mage can use it, but it's so large that it is propelled magically; the wearer more rides in it than wears it. I try it on, and the ground becomes far away; I look like an Iron or Adamantite Golem. When I take it off I find that it ingeniously can collapse so small as to easily fit into my pack or Bag Of Holding. While I am wearing it, my armour class is -21 with the Staff held, and it also gives me 5% Magic Resistance.

The other items are a strange launcher-like device called the Big Metal Rod, and three types of ammunition for it: Pulse, Frag Grenade and Scorcher. I will later learn that the Pulse very much resembles a Magic Missile, the Frag Grenade a Skull Trap that does fire damage, and the Scorcher... Aganazzar's Scorcher. I can use all of these items because like the Big Metal Rod works like a wand instead of a crossbow, which it superficially resembles, and the rate of fire is impressive. The ammunition is limitless. I am agog at my new finds, and will put them to good use.

But this is for later. I struggle to the inn as best I can, grow groggy as I fumble to pay the Innkeeper, and struggle to memorize my spells before I drop into a very deep sleep from which little could disturb me.

When I awaken, I am more refreshed than I have ever been after a night's rest, and return to the lair of Abazigal and whatever lies within. The forbidding structure is soon within sight, and I make my way quickly to the underground, the watery tunnels, and the cavern of many eyes. Now I am back to uncharted paths and will be cautious.

I make a wrong turn in this cavern and end up back where I started, so have to return, and find yet more eyes have arisen, a clump of them. I use my brand new Frag Grenades on the clump, take a little damage for my trouble, but they go down easily. I hit the remainders with the Scorcher to test it out, and it works well; just as with the spell of Aganazzar. I continue to seek this mage Iychard. I find him in the most obvious place: through the tunnel nearest the hidden door. He is busy making more eyes on stalks. He is somewhat insane, and he fulfills his end of the bargain by trading the eyestalk for a scroll that will reverse the geas on the dragon guarding Abazigal's lair, so I don't bother him further. Soon, I hope, his master will be dead and he will no longer have to hang around in this dismal laboratory making dangerous floating eyes. I check the broad tables that serve as his workbenches and find a page on golem building, like the one I found before, though I could find no use for it. I also have Lhaeozarus pick his pocket, but she finds nothing but a quarterstaff, and I am surprised he doesn't notice that go missing, and that she can carry it.

But my curiosity gets the better of me. Three eggs here appear interesting and I inspect them. When I do, a floating eye appears, but unlike the others. It is an Eye Of The Dead, and it casts Animate Dead and Vampiric Touch. I turn the Scorcher ammunition on it and keep it on until it is "dead" being undead already. The next egg holds a Gorgon Eye and I save against whatever it is casting at me, though I suspect to my dismay afterwards that this how the three adventurers became petrified; Gorgons do that sort of thing.

I don't know why I put myself in these circumstances: the next eye to appear is an Eye Of The Beholder, and it acts exactly like a real Beholder, so I throw on the Cloak Of Mirroring and raise Gnolls with the Wand Of Monster Summoning, in case it throws something really deadly at me. It slays them all but I am able to kill it with the Scorcher, which is quite the potent weapon. I noted what abilities it had and none of them seems instantly fatal so I shall have nothing to fear from it should I meet one again, which I do very soon. I check the eggs over and over and slay each of the three types of eyes several times, until there are none left. I talk to Ichyard and ask him what the eggs are for and he says that they hold his precious offspring and not to touch them! He is indeed off his rocker.

I notice that I can level up. Though I had been hoping for a fifth 9th level spell slot, I don't get one. I do get two hit points instead of one, which is strange, but I am not complaining. I would certainly trade a hit point for a spell. I have reached the limit of my abilities at level 31, for I far surpassed the leveling requirement and I have also reached eight million experience points. I ponder that number and think how many creatures died in obtaining it.

And three more die, for no experience at all. I try another of the tunnels from this place and three Elder Orbs confront me! They are not in that large of a cavern, but I will be able to maneuver. I immediately throw on the Cloak Of Mirroring and cast Spell Immunity: Abjuration before I get hit with the awful Anti-Magic Ray, to prevent the Imprisonments that these beings cast if their usual complement of deadlies is not working. I raise a Hakeashar but it is struck dead quickly. As I have come to like these weapons very much, I then turn the Scorcher on the Orbs in such a way that at least two are taking damage at all times. The expected Imprisonments come and I know that I would not be writing this had I not prepared for them, but they are absorbed by the anti-Abjuration shield. All I need to do then is avoid the Orbs, as they do tend to lose their temper and attempt to nibble their enemies if their spells are resisted. Soon all three are dead, and not a scrap of treasure nor anything else do I find here. I remember the "mad" Iychard had mentioned a cave of Elder Orbs and another of Kobolds. I wonder which tunnel leads to the Kobolds.

Soon I have explored all of the tunnels from the place and marked them carefully on my map, in a process of elimination, and determine that there is no cavern of Kobolds. This cavern, this place, even this life I lead, has little more to offer me. I must finish my task.

Day 26
------
I return to the dragon Fll'Yissetat, who is under the geas to serve Abazigal. I had thought, in the dim light, she was a metallic dragon, but as I approach her she is clearly a green... I stiffen slightly when her colour becomes apparent, but try to retain my composure and not show fear.

Although perturbed, she is honourable enough towards her rescuer, and when the geas is lifted, she ambles off in a draconian manner, mumbling but pleased to have her freedom.

The door looms before me. I really don't want to go in there. I'm going to be doing a lot of going back in time in there as I did with Draconis once. And I do, many times... I get pounded, smashed, slashed, electrocuted, Mazed, Imprisoned and every other way of death under the sun, or in this case, the ground.

But you don't want to hear about this, journal, do you? You want to hear about the toughest battle I have ever had in my life, by far, and the toughest I ever hope to, and how I pulled together and used every ounce of ingenuity and power and strength and endurance at my disposal and won the day... and a long day it was too, longer than I ever hope to experience again in my life, but fear I will be doing very, very soon. So I will tell you only of the victorious time, the last time.

The actors in my little play of pain were Abazigal (a large blue dragon, with electrical breath, who was in humanoid form when I entered,) Tamah (a not-so-large but still very nasty amethyst dragon, whose breath was either acid or cold,) four Drakes (their baby offspring) and five or so Frost Salamanders, who played the minor bit parts, serving mainly merely to get in the way.

Before entering, I rested to memorize spells: Spell Trap, Spell Immunity, and Mordenkainen's Sword figured prominently and I would recommend as many as possible to any who would fight families of Abazigals in future, though some were not memorized just yet as I will explain later. An Imprisonment, Summon Planetar and Improved Alacrity were thrown into the mixture and also were quite useful, nigh lifesaving. Though I have relied heavily on the Spell Trap of the Staff Of The Magi, it just wasn't enough for the barrage that took place. As well, if anyone decides to take on a roomful of dragons by themselves, they had best have the Big Metal Rod and Scorcher or equivalent.

I dug through my scroll case. Out came two scrolls each of Protection From Acid (which I have just bought from Lazarus, angered I hadn't a single one when I needed it for the battle with Draconis), Protection From Cold, and Protection From Fire. All six were read in succession. These handy scrolls last twelve hours, which I thought would be enough. It wasn't, but I did not need their effects when that time had elapsed, but instead the effects of the two Protection From Electricity scrolls which I placed in a handy spot, not being used immediately. Next, I Stoneskinned, drank an Oil Of Speed and raised a Spell Trap, though not from the Staff. That one can't be interrupted, so I saved it for when I might really not want to be interrupted.

Just before entering the lair, I stood like a runner preparing for a sprint, and cast Improved Alacrity, then dashed into the lair at top speed, and top it was, with the Oil Of Speed active. These enemies didn't hang around at the back waiting for me to prepare. The Drakes charged me immediately, but I was busy raising all the Mordenkainen's Swords I can and hasting them before the Improved Alacrity runs out. I ducked behind the first Sword so it was the closest thing to the approaching enemies, and resumed casting. When all the Swords were out, Tamah was close. She Wing Buffeted Swords, Drakes and me into the corner. I quickly hasted the Swords and set at least a couple on Tamah.

The big bitch had proven the most annoying of the six. I had steadily exhausted my possibilities in previous battles, and the six of them would prove too daunting to just about anyone, or a whole group of them. So, getting her out of the way quickly made all the difference in this battle; it went from utterly hopeless to winnable. With Abazigal in human form, he posed little threat if I merely kept away from him and though the Drakes were very fast and could stealth, they cast no spells.

Having distracted her with the Swords, Tamah had unwittingly helped me. Her Wing Buffet had busted up the traffic jam of Swords and Drakes and her husband and I at the lair's entrance, and she failed to notice that the weakest of her opponents did an end-run around her and cast Lower Resistance on her. This she noticed, and I bolted at top speed trying to buy more casting time, in a wide semi-circle to again place the Swords closer to her than I was. She resumed beating on them, the second Lower Resistance was cast. Again her focus changed and fell upon me, and again I was running at top speed. But her Wing Buffet caught me and the rest and smashed us into a corner. I was pinned. I cast Protection From Magical Weapons to avoid getting chopped to bits; if I had any great plans, I would have four rounds before getting messily massacred.

Round 1: Greater Malison. It stuck to Tamah with her nearly nullified magic resistance.
Round 2: I played the trump card up my sleeve, knowledge weaned from many previous failed battles. Tamah's armour had but a single flaw, and the next spell pierced the heart of that flaw. I cast Disintegrate, and a ton of Dragon dust settled to the floor.
Round 3: I raised monsters with the Wand Of Monster Summoning directly behind my massed enemies. They turned to attack my new allies, and I moved the allies backwards to draw them away from me. I was freed.

Freed, but still in danger and now alone, as the monsters lasted little longer than it took the four Drakes and Abazigal to walk or fly a few steps backwards. I cast Summon Planetar, and set it upon the Drakes. Now I played the second trump card up my sleeve: the Big Metal Rod and its Scorcher ammunition. Carefully avoiding Abazigal, I concentrated on the Drakes. Two are slain by the Planetar before its physical form was destroyed. The black drake is the fastest and most persistent of all. I need it out of the way. It is no dragon yet, so had not a dragon's immunities. Imprisonment did it in. I doubt anyone will happen to cast Freedom here for a long, long time. Now only one Drake, the Frost Salamanders and Abazigal himself remains.

The Drake and Frost Salamanders fall quickly to the endless fire of the Big Metal Rod's Scorcher, and then I am alone with Abazigal. Alone, and my spells nearly drained. Soon he would turn into a dragon if I kept hitting him, and I would not survive.

So, I led him to the farthest reaches of the cavern, then sprinted madly in the other direction, out of his sight. There was a cleft, I had noted previously, between two rocks, just large enough for me to squeeze into, and out of his line of vision, as Dragons in any form can see creatures invisible to human eyes. He paced up and down the cavern looking for me. He had sealed me in, but now his wards were being doubted. He gave me up for escaped, and returned to whatever it is he was doing. I changed some spells, adding numerous Spell Traps and Spell Immunities and valiantly tried to rest in the proverbial Dragon's Lair. He did not approach my hiding place, and I was saddened when I heard him wailing and calling to his lost Tamah. Evil or not, he had a heart and loved someone, and I killed her. I kill a lot of things, and I am tired of it. I would have told him this if I could, if it would make a difference: that I have been thrown into this life by lying Solars, manipulative allies and the power-madness of other Bhaalspawn, but I can't; he won't understand. I want to go home to Brynnlaw and never kill anything or anyone again. Is that too much to ask for? I rested, finally, dreaming of home.

When I awoke, I began the unpleasant but necessary task of killing Abazigal, alone. Silently removing the two Protection From Electricity scrolls from my pack, I incanted in barely a whisper the runes upon them, and their magic filled me as the paper dissolved into dust. I found Abazigal near the portal I had not come in from. He turned on me with murder in his eyes and heart, and I would not be able to speak reason to such a creature. Keeping away from him, I beat him slowly down with the Big Metal Rod's ammunition, until he was forced to reveal his true form or perish.

Exposed as the Blue Dragon he was, I played the last of my trump cards: my smallness versus his size. At the south end of the cave, a ridge of stone ran parallel to a low shelf of smooth rock beyond it. Elmonster the tiny human could handily fit in there, but Abazigal the giant Blue Dragon could not. Blue Dragons deal electrical attacks; they do not breathe fire nor are they immune to it. With both scrolls adding to the twenty percent resistance to electrical damage I picked up in the Abyss, his lightning breath could not damage me; in fact it healed me, as did the fire in the Marching Mountains complex. I cast Spell Immunity: Conjuration to prevent Abazigal casting Maze and Power Word: Blind on me, which would make me unable to attack from a distance, Spell Immunity: Abjuration to stop the Imprisonments he would occasionally try, as do the Elder Orbs, if nothing else worked, and a Spell Trap for everything else.

Then, drinking an Oil Of Speed, I turned the Scorcher of the Big Metal Rod on him. He started taking damage: a little at first, all the while becoming angrier with this human who mocked his strength and size by being unreachable. Finally he tail-slapped the ground, which shook the cavern, causing loose rocks on the ceiling to plummet, but none hit me. I stood my ground and continued the damage. A Wing Buffet knocked me backwards and I blacked out, but only briefly, and he continued to throw spells at me. How unfair: his spells were not interrupted by the Scorcher's damage to him, though mine would have been. When the Spell Trap was exhausted, I cast another one, and then put up another Spell Immunity: Conjuration. In the interim, he tried to heal himself, and I was successful in interrupting this spell and very thankful of it. He tail slapped again in anger and Wing Buffeted, and I was again knocked unconscious, and this time he was able to heal himself completely. But having wasted one spell, he could heal no more. I Scorched and Scorched and recast my shield when it was downed, recovered from Wing Buffets, shrugged off his electrical breath, and soon the Blue Dragon Abazigal, probably the mightiest of the Bhaalspawn (more so than Yaga-Shura once his invulnerability was gone) could stand no more, and dropped with a thud that resonated the cavern like a bass drum.

An honourable battle? No. But a necessary one. I lived. A lone honourable man would have died. So much for honour, and all its deadly trappings. I reappear in the Abyss and the Solar is there again. I really don't want to talk to her right now. I just want to rest again, perhaps for days. But talk to her I do. She conjures Yaga-Shura, who explains that the Bhaalspawn that I have sent to the Abyss were allies, allies whose purpose was to fill the Abyss with enough of the essence of Bhaal from the death of the rest of his children that Bhaal could return, and grant them demi-godhood in his realm, which would be the whole of Faerun bathed in the blood of its citizens.

But one remains: Balthazar. I had figured that I must eventually kill him. The townsfolk of Amkethran had been correct in thinking him a Bhaalspawn too. It seems, in a dying vision given to me by Abazigal, that he has captured Melissan, for what purpose I do not know. I sincerely hope that he kills her, for the good of the Realms and to save me the trouble. And then I return to the lair of Abazigal.

Day 27
------
Inspecting what Abazigal left behind, I find several of his scales can be pulled off easily, as Firkraag's could, loosened by the force of his impact with the rocky cavern floor. I take what I can; they still smell of air scorched by lightning and retain some measure of his electrical abilities. He also dropped the two-handed sword that he carried when in humanoid form; I knew it would be a potent one by the way that it glowed when he wielded it and indeed it is: a +5 enchanted blade that can also poison enemies. It will make a fine addition to my museum, or to the other purpose I had planned for the more potent of the weapons and armour I have found so far.

The large circular portal at the west end of Abazigal's lair has become accessible, and I correctly assume that it will be an immediate route to the surface, and who should greet me when I reappear in the centre of the grand foyer but Elminster. But as I speak to him, I wonder what change has taken place within him: is the ancient archmage, my almost-namesake, decaying into lichdom from the extension of his life? I have heard of good as well as evil liches and I fear that he may becoming one; his voice is that of a young man, and not even that of a young Elminster, nothing like I remember him. He is clearly involved in this with the Harpers, but is prevented from assisting me directly as are the other powerful entities of Faerun; I will have to complete this on my own, as I always have been required to. And then he is gone...

On returning to the Abyss, the blade of Abazigal becomes yet more powerful, being fused with the Heart Of The Damned and given the ability to level drain whom it strikes. I place the huge sword into a container, and can hardly wait to tell Sarevok of the battle I had with Abazigal and his kin. I do so over dinner and rest, returning my spells to their normal complement beforehand, not knowing what I may face.

I now have two more doors in the Abyss leading to challenges that I have not yet completed, so I decide that I will do them in the order that they were opened, so I enter unaware of what may be there. A spirit appears, blurry, but it is unrecognizably myself, or some lost incarnation of me. It tells me that it is my lost innocence, and that by submitting to it, I can become as I was in Candlekeep, and again I envision the fifteen-year-old boy full of glee at his first casting of Magic Missile. But what is done is done and the past is gone, and I tell the spirit that I am needed as I am; a young man who knows only Magic Missile is of little use in the challenges I must face to save the Realms, and the spirit instead assumes the form of the total lack of innocence: the Slayer that I can become at will and refuse to.

As did the self that I was told I would have become had I been the one left behind, its single-minded pursuit of me proves its undoing. Casting Protection From Magical Weapons to render it powerless for four rounds, I raise and haste four Mordenkainen's Swords off of Improved Alacrity while it flails uselessly at me. Surrounding it with the Swords, it is pinned, wanting only to attack me but being prevented from doing so. It is sliced to ribbons in a very short time, and I gain a further special ability when it falls: the Draw Upon Holy Might stolen from me by Irenicus is restored.

But yet another challenge awaits me and, for a short time, I may have the tools to deal with it. Swords and I rush quickly to the next challenge area and a very unnerving exchange occurs there: it would appear that I am conversing with the avatar of Cyric, who, for being the god of death, madness, murder and just about everything else that is negative, seems a well-spoken and intelligent fellow. So often does vileness cloak itself in robes of respectability. But his selfishness is inherent in that his only concern with me seems to be whether I will assume the role of the Lord Of Murder, taking one of his portfolios from him. I have no intention of this and say so. However he still doesn't like having me around, and on the premise of "challenging" me, which he indicates won't get him into trouble for interfering with his fellow gods, summons three of the Chosen Of Cyric: very fast and deadly assassins, as he was a thief himself before his ascension.

I don't take a single scratch in disposing of the three. The Swords are prepared already and they turn on the assassins. I cast True Sight to prevent them from disappearing into invisibility. The Scorcher allows me to add to the heavy damage they are taking. When the first sword disappears I know the rest will be gone very soon as well, so I immediately cast the fifth and last Mordenkainen's Sword I have memorized and send it into the fray. When the remainder disappear this one will last the duration, and it does. Soon all the assassins are dead. They vanish as they die.

As the challenge area that is now a mountain oasis did, this area changes when the last of the assassins is gone. Three huge busts of a female watch me from the walls. She appears to be a goddess, but which? All three appear to be aspects of the same goddess, or perhaps they are triplets. Mystra, perhaps, and her daughters? Or just her daughters? I am sure that the meaning will become clear soon. For now, I depart the plane, returning to Amkethran and my almost-certain confrontation with Balthazar. The portal returns me to Abazigal's lair, and a dreary twelve-hour march is required before I reach Amkethran. But the evening comes and the air cools, and it is halfway between midnight and dawn when I first enter the town.

The first thing I notice is that every one of the mercenaries and monks has gone hostile to me, so I avoid them invisibly and instead seek shelter in the cavern formerly occupied by the smugglers. There are a few corpses of smugglers here now, though they had left peacefully before; a lot has changed since I was here last. I return here because I have heard that the man I least want to see, least want to trust and deal with, Saemon Havarian, was the leader of the smugglers and the only one who can get me into Balthazar's temple, as his dealings with the monks have given him knowledge of entry. I will have to trust him again and I don't doubt he will double-cross me if given the opportunity.

Saemon is indeed here and I will have to trust him. First, I must rest to gain back the spells I lost in the battles in the Abyss. I can't rest in the cavern for some reason, so I grip the Staff and return to the Zephir Inn. Unfortunately, I have to slay the mercenary mage and two fighters who have been a fixture of this inn since my arrival; they turn on me the moment I enter. The mage doesn't have time to cast any spells (and appears to have none memorized) and the fighter's swords pass harmlessly through me. I collect their weapons and armour and sell it all to the innkeeper, then rest as best I can for eight hours. No monks nor mercenaries disturb my slumber.

Day 28
------
When I leave the inn, I do so invisibly to prevent having to fight the monks and mercenaries outside, but I am not successful. The monks guarding the temple see me and attack me, and I end up doing battle with the whole town of them, though it is not difficult. I merely wear the Big Metal Unit, and my armour class goes down to -19 even using the ranged Frag Grenade and Scorcher ammunition of the Big Metal Rod. I don't feel good about this battle at all, but they keep attacking me, so I keep defending myself. Waves of new attackers arrive as the old fall, and at the end I would estimate that over fifty monks and mercenaries lie dead.

Although I don't wish to be a Lord Of Murder at all, circumstances don't reflect this very well, do they?

I empty my Bag Of Holding at the Zephir inn and find why it was getting full so easily before: there were fifteen Potions Of Extra Healing in it; they get transferred to the Potion Case. I meander about the now-empty town and pick up everything I find but normal arrows. The only person with a normal sword, the Captain, dropped a key for the monastery gates. I won't need Saemon and his scumbag schemes any more, but when I enter the cave to confront him for his previous betrayals, he vanishes like smoke. When I return to the Zephir inn and sell off the armour, weapons, scrolls, potions and gems of the dead mercenaries and monks, I now have over four hundred thousand gold pieces. Now Amkethran has little to offer me, so I must do battle with Balthazar and leave this place, perhaps forever. I like warmth but not excessively, and also like being able to escape from it into the cool brine of the sea, and only Brynnlaw can offer me this.

And so I do battle with Balthazar, and as Draconis was, he is nothing but a stinking cheat. No monks confront me when I raise the huge portcullis guarding the monastery and I enter easily enough, but all thoughts of winning this battle with many tries soon vanish. His reasons behind his actions are finally made plain: indeed, he is a Bhaalspawn like myself, but one with a better purpose than the others. He infiltrated the Five with the hopes of wiping them out, and I don't doubt that he would have been able to. But when I happened on the scene, he allowed my progress in doing his dirty work for him to see how far that I would get. When I am no more, he plans to ensure that there are no remaining Bhaalspawn and then commit ritual suicide. Seeing that he regenerates and is immune to weapons of less than +3 enchantment, slaying and poison, I strongly doubt he would be able to. I have the best possible reputation I could and I respond to him, forcefully denying that I am like the other Bhaalspawn. He agrees with this as well, saying that many have sung my praises and that I have walked a virtuous path, but merely by being the son of Bhaal I will cause a river of blood to flow through the land in future and must be eliminated regardless. And then, he is through talking to me. What a self-righteous jerk; had he half a mind and an ounce of initiative I would have been happy to have him accompany me to make sure that I fulfilled the closure of the prophecy without ascending, and he could have actually done something to prevent Bhaal's return

His students aren't too difficult to deal with, but Balthazar is immune to basically everything: he can't be Disintegrated, Imprisoned, Polymorphed, Slain, Stunned or a host of other things that could help me get rid of him. Not only is he about ninety percent magic resistant, he is completely immune to first and second level spells. He casts Greater Malisons that add up; what is he, a monk or an archmage's archmage? When he uses his "Lunar Stance" he casts six magic missiles. Six of them! I only get five. His abilities never seem to run out, and he moves much faster than a monk should be able to. He has far too many hit points for a human of any stripe, far too many Lay On Hands for a monk, heals himself often with potions and regenerates. And most bizarre of all: he is immune to Timestop. When I cast this, I am the one stopped in time; to anyone else viewing this it appears that I move or cast spells or attack instantaneously. This is so difficult to get around that only those mortals Chosen Of Mystra such as Elminster, or Powers and demigods and higher should be exempt, and this is done by their sharing of the same timeframe as the caster; the spell affects them as well as the caster so that relatively they are in equivalent time. How Balthazar engineered this is beyond anything I will ever know. Monks don't have a god per se; their faith is that of the energies of the universe itself. Who could he appeal to for such an exemption?

It takes me a lot of tries and frustration, and when I finally bring him down it is more through luck than anything else, while merely testing a couple of other spells to see whether they will stick to him and affect him, determining the limits of his invulnerability. I draw his students away from him, leaving him alone, and slay them near the entrance to the monastery with a Mordenkainen's Sword, the Scorcher and the Staff. Balthazar, thinking his students are more than a match for me, stays out of the conflict. But when the Planetar's sword strikes him forcefully, he is brought back into it. He is now alone, but more than a match for five of anyone else. The last and final try the Planetar makes all its saves against his innate stunning abilities, I cast True Sight to prevent his endless Improved Invisibitities, lower his resistance to nil, Greater Malison him and bring him down with Energy Blades. With his resistance gone, the frightful number of attacks he takes from the Blades I hurl at him nine times per round and the hasted Planetar, he finally can't keep up and dies.

For perhaps the final time, I am jolted back into my Abyssal home-away-from-home, and what follows is nothing more than a confirmation of what seemed obvious all along: Melissan has been manipulating everything. However, she is not a Bhaalspawn. Instead, she was the high priestess of Bhaal and the one responsible for managing his essence. She is planning on ascending as a sort of "Lady Of Murder" when the remainder of the Bhaalspawn are dead, including myself. She is more than willing to battle me right there in the Abyss, but the Solar won't allow it. I will choose the time of this conflict.

I would like to get this over with, finally, and completely. I am tired of the adventuring life more than I can describe, and the days' passage make me grow more distant from Brynnlaw and the home I am eager to return to. But word has reached me of a place I have not yet visited, a forbidding keep where... something... is imprisoned, something that only a few in Faerun could deal with, and something that may escape. Judging by the lackadaisical performance of my "allies" thus far, I doubt anyone else will assist in this. They will say how busy they are elsewhere and ignore the problems. But I have also heard that there are many magical artifacts in this place, and I would like to see it for this reason; I would like to collect as many museum-quality pieces as I can.

I will have to decide on this. I will try to not do it for selfish reasons. There are many other, younger adventurers in the world and I need to leave something for them, but that very youth and inexperience could easily get them killed if the rumours I have heard of what dwells in the bowels of this place are true...

Day 29
------
But before I have any options, I must first defeat another very difficult opponent, a huge and very dark Pit Fiend: the Ravager, the other avatar of my dead "father," in the final Abyssal challenge. I need many failed attempts before he finally falls, but I don't die at all in doing so; rather the kick back in time occurs when things are hopeless but I am still alive. The Ravager wears down like sandpaper rather than killing outright; five Bone Blades (which look like Mordenkainen's Swords) accompany him at all times, and if one is destroyed a new one arises to take its place. He raises Blade Barrier whenever the current one expires. But I don't mind him half as much as I did Balthazar; the avatars of gods are supposed to be difficult things to bring down; he doesn't move around very much though his throwing daggers are a pain, literally. But bring him down I do, though as far as straight hit points go, he was probably the strongest opponent I have ever faced in my life, more so than the Wraith of my half-brother, whom I can now call my brother, that I encountered in yet another of the Abyssal places my travels have brought me to.

I expect that the Ravager will have all the immunities that Balthazar did and was not entitled to, and he has them all plus one more: he is immune to Lower Resistance. But I find that Pierce Shield, an 8th level spell, lowers his resistance just fine. I prepare for this battle by changing almost every spell I have and then resting. I am careful to memorize: five Mordenkainen's Swords, four each of Skull Trap and Protection From Magical Weapons, three each of Pierce Shield and Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting, two Energy Blades, Chain Contingency, Improved Alacrity, Greater Malison, Tenser's Transformation and Stoneskin. I haven't used a Contingency yet but this is a good opportunity to. I will unload most of these in a very short timeframe.

When I awaken, I cross the warm stone floor of the Abyssal plane and prepare for battle. I cast Chain Contingency, followed by the three Pierce Shields. The energy of the three spells is captured in the Contingency. At the end of the casting I incant while picturing in my mind an enemy, any enemy. It will trigger on the nearest enemy when one is sighted.

In order that my allies will last as long as possible as time is of the essence, my next casting is that of Improved Alacrity, followed in very quick succession by all five Mordenkainen's Swords and Hasting of them and myself. As soon as this is done I order them ahead of me into the challenge chamber. Quickly I follow with Stoneskin, Blur, Improved Invisibility, Draw Upon Holy Might (should I require it) and the first of the memorized Energy Blades. I may as well use everything I have to protect myself as I will certainly be resting again soon. I follow the Swords in.

When I reach the top of the stairs, the Ravager appears, and speaks in a voice that seems to echo throughout the reaches of the cavern and time itself... his voice reminds me of some of the liches that I encountered in Athkatla. But the size and darkness of the Ravager, the five Bone Blades that continually haunt my step in the battle that follows, and the perpetual Blade Barrier that surrounds him combine with the surrealism of the location: stone hands protrude from the wall and the bands of light and dark rock of the floor entwine as if it had been melted and refused, and I feel totally lost and alone here, in the realm of something that I will never understand and whose depth and power will extend beyond all my comprehension, and will certainly arise though I may slay it once.

But I have not time for further contemplation; I have work to do, and commanding the five Swords to strike I rush forward as the Ravager attacks, close to him, so that the Chain Contingency triggers and simultaneously spits three Pierce Shields on him, nearly nullifying his magic resistance. Around the Ravager, chaos ensues as ten swords, mine and his, whip the air, the Ravager and each other. Occasionally one of my Swords flies out of the caterwauling stunned and limps back into the fray. While this occurs, I unload all the Energy Blades on the Ravager to soften him up. He takes slight damage but the process is started. He is completely immune to their electrical effects but at least the damage of the impact is good.

The swords hardly damage him; he is highly resistant to all types of physical damage, but this is not what I had in mind for him. While his resistance is nearly zero, I cast Greater Malison on him and then Protection From Magical Weapons on myself so that the Bone Blades don't cause me to waste my upcoming essential damage spells. When it is cast, I unload the three Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wiltings on him in a row, and now he takes full damage from them and fails his saving throws twice. He is now at Injured status. Soon after this, the Mordenkainen's Swords begin to unsummon, but I had planned for this. Due to the speed at which they were summoned, the last is gone scant seconds from the first, and as it falls I refresh my Protection From Magical Weapons, granting me immunity from the Ravager's attacks and the Bone Blades. Now that there are no allies to injure, I unload the four Skull Traps on him over the next four rounds, and he goes to Nearly Dead status, failing two of his saving throws. I take a hit from a Bone Blade as my Protection From Magical Weapons has run out, so I cast it yet again.

With four rounds of safety, I can cast my second Energy Blades, and then follow it with Tenser's Transformation. My base THAC0 falls to zero, and with the Energy Blades it becomes -12. Now I can only miss him on Critical Misses. I hurl sixteen of the twenty of them as carefully as I can, and on the seventeenth he falls; the Ravager is no more, for now. The Bone Blades are struck down, and I have completed the final challenge. Melissan, in her hellish fury, awaits me. I must destroy my home-away-from-home in the Abyss to confront her.

Sometimes the most long-lasting decisions are made in the heat of the moment, and when the Portal speaks to me and requires a decision, it is not difficult to make. Melissan will wait; I will journey to the keep that I have heard of, and see what needs to be done. First, to Amkethran: I sell off some non-magical Full Plate that I had stored in the Abyss, the gems dropped by Balthazar and a few other minor items. I then visit Lazarus Librarius, and find yet two more spells I didn't know already: Otiluke's Resilient Sphere and Power Word: Silence (these things tend to happen in pairs.) Knowing that I will have to transport anything that I find in the keep, as well as all the items that I have saved up in the Abyss, I buy the Bag Of Holding that he has for sale. I should have really bought this long ago as the first one kept filling up, but soon it will be a necessity.

Day 30
------
I could use a refreshing of my spells and to rest to memorize them, but I will reward myself for reaching my destination with rest then. I don't know what is to be done there, but I will find out soon enough. I depart on the long journey north, and soon the desert heat gives way to forest, cool meadows and streams. I am heading into the mountains and the ground gently slopes upward; soon peaks appear over the horizon in the hazy distance. But Watcher's Keep is at an isolated place, that somehow seems removed from the idyllic pastoral setting. Though fish play beside it there is something ominous about this fortress sprung from the living rock that contains it. It is not a quality of darkness, for it is not dark, but a quality of being far more than it seems.

I become invisible as I approach the keep, to scout the area and see what I can. Its grounds are rather pleasant, and not what I expected. An obelisk bearing the seals of Helm stands near the front of the grounds, announcing to any who would visit that perhaps the most powerful of the gods beneath Lord Ao has taken a personal hand in this place... and whatever lies within.

Six of the followers of Helm are here; they are Odren, Brother Pol, Sister Garlena, and three Watch Knights. They guard this place, waiting for the escape of whatever it is that lies inside. I agree to at least have a look for them, and I will evaluate what can be done. Though they are six and I one, they greet my arrival as the answer of their prayers. Am I that well-known? They even call me the "Child of Bhaal." I didn't wish for my "heritage" to be so publicized, but they are decent and kind people so I owe them no grudge for knowing of it. I am glad I decide to travel to here; I like the priests of Helm that I met, and if their order needs assistance, I am happy to provide it.

When I agree to their quest, we walk to the top level of the keep. A huge, metallic hemisphere serves as the door to this place, and it opens to allow my passage. I peer inquisitively in but see nothing but the circular floor. Sister Garlena will buy and sell items, and Brother Pol has some useful information for me, so I talk to them first.

According to Brother Pol, this is known: there are five levels to the keep, each with a set of seals to break to progress. When I reach the bottom level, I am to read a scroll he gives me imprinted with runes that will restore the wards of the Imprisoned One, though he does not know who that is. Helm has commanded that the Imprisoned One should not be killed. This gives me at least a hint as to its identity: it could be a fell creature, a demon. Kill a demon and it doesn't die, but instead returns to its plane, and in a century or so can return to the Prime Material to pose a threat. But imprison a demon properly and it is no longer a threat while it lives; only its death will release it. Brother Pol also gives me a holy wardstone which will allow access to this place; if I lose it, I can never escape or re-enter.

Sister Garlena has no Protection From Undead scrolls, but does sell two artifact weapons, useless to me but of museum quality in the strength and perfection of their enchantment. One of them catches my eye merely by its name: the Short Sword Of Mask. I am reminded of the fall of my "father" Bhaal. He was slain not so much by Cyric as Mask; Cyric killed Bhaal with a dagger that was really an avatar of Mask. Or was it a short sword? I am doubtful that this is the weapon, but being an item of Mask ties it to the fall of Bhaal, and to myself. So I pay a large sum of gold for it, and also for Firetooth, a crossbow that makes its own flaming bolts. The enchantments on this item are masterfully intricate to give it such a complex ability; there are at least a hundred separate castings that I can tell which indicates a thousand I cannot, so I add it to my collection. And then, putting my fears aside, I enter Watcher's Keep, swallowed up by the gaping, gleaming mouth before me.

My first thought is that this place doesn't appear so bad; looks a little like Candlekeep with the bookshelves and clean, sparse decor, and the Archivist who I see there doesn't detract from this. Unlike the ones at Candlekeep, this one is dead, a spectre. Brother Pol had warned me that half of the Watchers of Helm here had agreed to become spectral Watchers upon their deaths, and are dangerous, but this one seems harmless. There are some containers here but I will see what else this level holds before taking anything. I run into a Stone Golem beyond this. I take a knock from it, but when I Stoneskin, break out the Girdle Of Bluntness and the Rod Of Smiting golem-slayer staff (I had forgotten I had it before) it is down in two hits.

Four Vampiric Wraiths lie beyond a large arched set of double doors; they can't touch me with their probing appendages so I dispose of them quickly with the Staff. Further, a large library holds several assorted Mephits. I raise a few Dire Wolves and happily bash them all, taking no damage. I continue my exploration. Five Mustard Jellies in the furthest room go down to the Scorcher. No problems so far... I try the rooms on the other side of the nave. Several Sword, Phase and other assorted spiders are here. Easy pickings with the Scorcher. A smaller antechamber off of this holds no enemies at all. In the furthest, two giant Adamantium Golems stand. They are not hostile, and appear to be guarding what appears to be a tomb with a sarcophagus at one end; I leave them alone for now. Lining the central nave are many statues.

Now that I've explored the area, I start opening containers. I am agog; I was underestimating just how much of a treasure trove this place is and I am collecting so many items I will need time to organize them and check them carefully. There are few that I can't open, and I will Knock those after I rest. I collect everything I can. Off of the antechamber was a very comfortable looking bedroom with a canopy bed, table and sofa. As well, two doors can be closed between it and the apse it leads from so I can feel somewhat secure in there. I return to that comfortable bed/sitting room, carefully remove the books from the table and begin examining what I found so far. Though the Keep's occupants are long-dead, there is no dust here and everything is in nearly new condition; the spectres must be busy.

I check over the items: a pair of paladin's bracers that give ten bonus hit points. This might be upgradable. A Quiver and Case Of Plenty that make unlimited +1 enchanted arrows and bolts. I was able to upgrade the Bag Of Plenty that does the same for sling bullets, so I might be able to do the same with these. Finally: the Golem Manual that those pages I found before appear to be taken from. This one will summon a Flesh Golem. I read it over carefully, not in any rush to continue with such a treasure in my hands. It's the first descriptive technical treatise on golem construction I have yet seen in my travels; such minutiae are usually scattered about several volumes and require cross-referencing, but this one has just about everything in one place: components, cantrips for preparation of the components, wording of all enchantments in order and methods of establishing the telepathic link upon completion. This is, to me at least, a sacred text and it will occupy an esteemed position in my library. I fail to see how such a useful text was ever buried in the sands of time.

But there is yet more: a shoulder case that holds all manner of ammunition. Though my sling doesn't need bullets it still is useful to keep any arrows, bolts or bullets in that I might find. And some stranger items: a tinderbox for stove-lighting, an old bell, a scented candle, an ornate key, two halves of a wardstone (one is imprinted with a golem; this must be for the pair for golems by the sarcophagus) and a pair of slippers. I am sure all of these items' meanings will become clear soon, so I carefully return them to the Bag of Holding and return to poring over the Golem Manual. I light the candle with a cantrip and read earnestly by candlelight and then decide that the canopy bed looks like the right place to read... and I doze off for a few minutes. The tiredness of the long journey here is making itself known. I force myself to restore the spells I had changed earlier while struggling to keep myself awake, blow out the candle and almost immediately drift into blissful slumber in the comfortable bed.

Day 31
------
I wasn't as isolated as I had thought: shortly after drifting off, I am awakened by the opening of the bedroom door and several Mummies and Ghasts shamble in. How dare these undead pollute my sanctum? I lead them out so as not to have to look at their vile corpses and crisp them in seconds with the Scorcher. I return to my rudely interrupted sleep and I am not disturbed further.

I awaken midmorning and feel refreshed, and with three Knocks at my disposal I can open the remaining chests. One holds an enchanted +3 dart that returns to the wielder's hand, a +2 suit of chainmail (I found many of these on dead mercenaries.) As well, I find more things to read, so return to the comfortable sofa to read them as my reading was interrupted last night by falling asleep.

However,on the way back I find a "Holy Book" in the altar. When I pick it up, several of the statues come to life and aren't pleased with me at all. One of them is a cleric and her bloody Insect Plague flies get me. I can't cast spells with these silly flies nibbling me and buzzing. I turn the Scorcher on them, angrily. They don't last very long. I return to my reading.

As I return to the comfortable room through the temple, I notice a statue encased in glass in the apse room at the northwest. I hadn't seen it before, but I know immediately who it is: it appears exactly like the larger statue of Demogorgon I found in the Underdark, whose Demon Knights yielded me the Girdle Of Frost Giant Strength that served me so well. What could this be doing in a temple of... and I am struck cold with the realization: is THIS what dwells in the bowels of this keep? It may be; I already reasoned that it had to be demonic by the commandment not to kill it, as it may return.

When I read carefully over the works that I have found, this hypothesis is only further strengthened by the History Of The Imprisoned One, which reads that a "Prince of the Underplanes" can be found here. So I try to disregard this knowledge for now, lest I depart the keep and never return, and fail in the task I have chosen. I continue my reading. A couple of pages of ritual scrolls detail placement of the articles I found (the bell, holy book and candle) in the altar; I will keep this in mind. A handwritten note reads "Short medium square makes big muscles" and is signed by "Lum". Ahhh... Lum The 'Mad', confirmed by another note signed L.t.M. Yes, old Lum was mad like a fox. Brilliant is a better word for it; brilliance can be mistaken for madness by those who don't know better, and Lum could do things with magical energies which weren't supposed to be done. I wonder if he was the one who designed the wards to keep Demogorgon, or whatever it is, entrapped here. I doubt anyone else could have done so.

As well as this, there are two notes written by the priests who now dwell here as spectres. One indicates that a forgetful one had a chapter and verse embroidered on his sleeve in order to remember his ritual (I will have to find that) and another is a sad note from an old-sounding priest that details how he has lost the tinderbox and can't light the stove in winter; he appears to be freezing to death. I have the tinderbox; I wonder what will happen when the stove is lit. Probably something will attack me; this is the usual outcome to most of my curiosity. But a plaque with the symbol of Helm sheds some light on this: it is a memorial for an archivist who tended the fire and brought the slippers of the other priests. When I light the stove, the wood crackles into flame immediately (it may have had centuries to season.) The spectral Archivist reappears here, happy to be near a warm fire. Ah, he must have been the writer of the note. He tells me of an old priest in the northeast and that he was always grumpy in the mornings if his favourite slippers weren't presented. I will have to check that.

Holding the slippers in plain view, I gently slide the lid of the sarcophagus off. A lich appears. However he is calmed by the slippers and invites me to see what else is in there, and vanishes. He is the forgetful priest mentioned in the note I found earlier and was entombed in the robes with "Holy Book - Chapter XII, verse XIV" embroidered inside. This must be a key to leaving this level of the Keep.

Examining the ritual scrolls, I can easily determine that there are three parts to it, and when they are arranged in order, the components are: ring the bell twice, light the candle, read the book, and then ring the bell a final time. But I don't do that just yet. The nave is lined with statues and I have seen before that they come alive when intruders are here. I will not be allowed to progress that easily. I summon a Planetar and a Mordenkainen's Sword, placing the Planetar near the mage's statue and the Sword near a fighter, and Stoneskin. Then I place the three components on the altar and perform the ritual.

Immediately the portal to the second level of the Keep comes alive, and so do all the statues. But planning ahead can make all of the difference. I cast True Sight to make the Planetar's job of dealing with the mage easier, and take out the rest of the enemies simply and effectively with the Scorcher while they are picking on Mordenkainen's Sword. Though the Golem can't be hit directly, hitting the enemy behind it and passing the fire column through it does it in. I can now progress to the second level. I notice that some of the statues dropped real items, and find a powerful named +3 bastard sword called Foebane and a +4 ninja-to called Usuno's Blade. They will make welcome additions to my collection. I leave and sell off other saleable items that I found: some +3 and Flame Arrows, the +2 suit of chainmail. I decide to keep the +3 bow for now. But I can't sell the +2 halberd as the priestess is insistent that it's stolen. No, I reply, it was from a statue. But she reasserts that it is stolen, so I return it to the Bag of Holding.

To see what can be done with what I found, I pop back to the Abyss and chat with Cespenar. I am able to upgrade the Paladin's Bracers (no item required,) Runehammer (with the Rune Of Clangeddin,) Case Of Plenty (no item required) and Golem Manual; I really wanted it to summon a Clay Golem (as they are immune to slashing, piercing and missile weapons) but I will settle for the Juggernaut Golem it can produce; according to the description it will deflect damage from me while it exists. Though I wanted to upgrade the Shortsword Of Mask very much to divine its history if possible, I already used the Heart Of The Damned on Abazigal's Blade, so this route is forever closed to me. I need to find a Rogue Stone for the Quiver of Plenty and a scabbard for Foebane. I will return to the Keep.

I do so, and re-enter, and step through the newly opened portal. I immediately find the surroundings have changed and I am in another level of the Keep. A large iron cage, warded against escape, holds a Chromatic Demon. It speaks to me. Of course, it wants to escape and tells me that I will have to find four magical scepters to unlock its cage with, or I will never progress to the next level. I don't like making deals with demons, but I will see if I can get around it somehow. I explore the floor carefully. It is probably laden with traps and these traps will become ever more deadly as I progress, so I Stoneskin again and put up a Spell Trap. And I am proven correct; traps of all sorts assail me including a nasty Abi-Dalzim's one that I can't avoid, but most I do. I encounter a bunch of Kuo-Toans, whom I can't stand, but the Frag Grenades put them down quickly. A group of Desert Trolls and a Dust Mehpit could prove annoying, but I lure them into where I appeared at first and drop a Cloudkill from the wand, and all of them are instantly struck dead. I will have to keep this in mind for future encounters.

There is also a Rukh Rakshasa in the same place and he has a Cloudkill of his own, so I wander out of it and smite him with the Staff; his normal sword is worthless against me. There are four large doors here and all of them locked. One is hot, one stinks, one is cold. The last one is guarded by an Imp, and when I tell him that his masters are dead, he leaves, but not before giving me some information: the door he guards is the door of Air. There were four sets of wizards here and the four doors guard their respective creations in fire, air, cold and slime. I will have to figure out a way of defeating their creations.

I open the door. The hum of electrical energy is apparent. There is a central source here and it seems to be converting the electricity to a large fan at the north end. I inspect the fan; these wizards were able to turn electrical energy into a way to spin the fan using a series of magnets arranged in a circle in a metal casing. Marvelous... it is too bad that they are dead and their secrets with them, but now that I know it is possible, I will note this for future research.

When I approach the power source and switch it on, it hums briefly, then the fan starts to turn, but two Greater and two Lesser Air Elementals and a Guardian of Air (looks like an Invisible Stalker, if one can be said to "look like" anything appear.) Worse, the wires are leaky, and electrical discharges strike me. Ouch! Since this only seems to happen near the fan and its power source, I lead the five creatures of air back where I came, cast Stoneskin and Improved Haste from the Cloak, and dust off the Staff Of Air +2 that I haven't used in a while, which forces Air Elementals to Save Vs. Death when struck by it. Two of them are slain by this effect, and the remainder are easy to keep away from. They fall to the Pulser ammunition of the Big Metal Rod, and the Guardian of Air falls to the Staff Of The Magi; it can't damage me. When it disappears, it leaves one of the magical Sceptres behind, which I use to quickly control the power supply to the fan so I am not injured further by the electricity from it. My innate twenty percent electrical resistance hardly helps.

My next target is the Slime chamber, and slimy it is. Several Slimes, Poison Mists and something I haven't seen before, a Giant Snake, attack me. From previous experience I know that the Slime is vulnerable to fire, so the Scorcher does them all in; I need merely stay away from them. I especially don't want to get close to the snake; it looks dangerous. There is a perpetual double-potency Cloudkill here at all times, and when I leave, it follows me into the peaceful library beyond. Luckily it goes no further. In the slime pit in the centre, I found a flail head that does poison damage, and it appeared that the snake was the keeper of the Sceptre for this area. The next door is that of Ice.

The ice creatures within don't present much of a challenge; they won't venture out of their cold home. They come out a few steps and then have to retreat when the warm air strikes them. I feel badly for them, but otherwise I cannot complete this quest, which may be vitally important. I equip the Firetooth dagger, grit my teeth, and slay them. The Ice Golem drops the Sceptre I require.

The last location is that of Fire. A Fire Giant dwells there, and several Greater Fire Elementals. I don't have much of a problem with them; the Pulser can strike them and I can keep away from them well enough, but there is a never ending supply. Eventually I just lead the group of them into another area and slam the door on them, trapping them, then deal with the Fire Giant. Like the ice creatures, he won't leave his swelteringly hot area. When he returns to it, he regenerates, very quickly. I lure him out, slam both doors on him trapping him outside, and find he's still regenerating too quickly. I cast two Pierce Shields on him, then Greater Malison, and finally Finger Of Death. It fails; he makes his save. I have no choice but to cast Imprisonment on him, and hope that he drops his Sceptre, which he does.

I now have all four Sceptres and I wonder what will happen when I present them to the Chromatic Demon. Demons aren't known for honouring their commitments, and this one is shifter than most. It appears in its own form, as an Ice Golem, Air Elemental or Earth Elemental, depending on when I look at it. It will almost certainly turn on me.

And it does, but its foolish premonition of my death is just enough time for me to get Improved Alacrity cast. I was planning on resting anyways soon, so I go overboard and raise three Mordenkainen's Swords when one would have been sufficient. I Stoneskin and cast Tenser's Transformation off the Improved Alacrity and send the Swords out of range of any Death Spell that might be called up by the demon. But he calls up nothing. He is very resistant to damage, so I use my noodle and switch from the Staff when he's a demon to the Scorcher when he changes into an Ice Golem. He takes full damage from the fire and he's soon dead, or back in the Abyss, freed at last. He drops a +4 spearhead called Ixil's Spike, and the Circlet Of Netheril that Cespenar had told me could be upgraded to an item that mages would like. Finally...

He also drops a Portal Key out of this level, and I ponder what I will run into on the next level down. It can't be that bad as it's only halfway, but I will soon find out. There are two portals here, smaller than the one on the first level. Perhaps one of them is a way out. I could leave this place... and I do. From the portal I am suddenly outdoors, by one of the doors on long stairways up the side of the Keep. The door has opened behind me to permit me reentry. I can come and go as I wish. I great burden lifts from my heart thinking of all the dungeons that I have ever been stuck in, thanking whoever designed this place for this happychance escape route. From battling a demon in the confinements of a hot dungeon to seconds later standing under a night sky spattered with a myriad of the individual pinpricks of stars, cool breezes filling my robes right through the Stoneskins, and the Watchers of Helm ever-vigilant and wakeful guarding over this place... all in a day's work for an adventuring mage as myself.

I speak with Sister Garlena and I'm glad that she buys as well as sells, unlike other temples. I sell off: a hundred and twenty Acid Arrows and Bolts Of Lightning, eighty Arrows Of Ice, Arrows of Fire and Bolts Of Lightning, forty Bolts of Biting, Bolts Of Biting and Arrows of Piercing, twenty +1 darts, nineteen Antidote Potions, five Arrows Of Dispelling, a Wand Of Sleep (never had any use for those wand for some reason,) two Stone to Flesh spell scrolls and copies of Elminster's Ecologies (and they fetch a hundred and fifty gold apiece,) an Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting and Identify spell scroll, a +2 Small Shield, and a normal longsword from the Rukh (I can't believe I even kept that.)

I can't sell the hundred and two Kuo-Toa bolts. I was never able to stack these things more than ten to a pile before, which is why I never picked them up; it figures that as soon as I get the Ammo Belt I no longer require it for them, and can no longer sell them. But do sell and buy back the one wand I wanted most to recharge: the Wand of Spell Striking, a nice find which can cast Breach and Pierce Magic to remove spell protections. The former is definitely preferable; my preferred way of removing spell protections is to bash the offending mage to death with the Staff. Unfortunately it comes back with as many charges as it originally had; it is a thin and delicate wand that can hold little energy. I check my wands carefully; the Wand Of Monster Summoning and Wand of Cloudkill are getting a little tired, so I sell them to Sister Garlena and these do get fully recharged by her when I buy them back.

And in the cool and clear night air, I decide to relax for a few minutes, and try to catch up on my reading of found items by the moonlight and it is then that I finally find out why the Fire Giant was so regenerative. In the scrawl of one of the feuding mages that dwelled in this place, I read that the Fire Giant was invulnerable until his Greater Fire Elemental accompaniment was separated from him and led to the ice chamber, where they would perish. No wonder... this is my punishment for lapsing on my reading and a warning to anyone who would forsake their studies. I resolve to not lapse again on careful and immediate interpretation of anything and everything I find.

In the deep of night under the pale moon I set out alone and descend to the keep grounds, and listen... I hear a quiet chorus of crickets in the night and the wind whispers in the rustling of leaves. The stark obelisk of Helm seems like a visitor from another world planted here, and it is in a strange way... a thing from the gods, so it is said. And I relax again for a time; I need these moments of quiet introspection on cool nights as a respite from the dungeons, the demons, the possible deaths that await me around every corner and the bizarre creatures that follow my footfalls and smell my blood. But a few minutes in this peaceful setting cleanse the malingering doubts and hardship ennui and they vanish into the whispering winds like dust, and I am a free man in my mind. I can take that dusty trail and walk and walk and never look back at this place; walk all the way to the coast and catch the next sailing ship to Brynnlaw and never leave again... and the memory and knowledge that I am not trapped in some cosmic game, that I am a free man, soothes me, and I can continue on my mission, wherever it may take me.

I return to the Abyss, Cespenar, and Sarevok. Cespenar does present me with a suitable powerful item for my investment. The Circlet of Netheril is completed by the union of the Bronze Ioun Stone, and for the first time in a long time, my hand ascends and I catch the Pale Green Ioun Stone that has been whirling about my head, and place in gently in the Bag of Holding. With the Circlet in place, I can memorize an extra 7th and 8th level spell and don't lose the benefit of the extra ten hit points provided by the Pale Green Ioun Stone either. Remembering the times I have been caught with my proverbial pantaloons down in elemental attacks, I choose Protection From Energy in the 8th level slot, and Project Image, a spell I have not tried yet but am interested to, in the 7th.

When I return to the Keep, I am careful to check the current level thoroughly before progressing on to the next. I am rewarded for my caution with a peculiar wand: the Wand Of Cursing, which simultaneously blinds, deafens and mutes its unfortunate target. I make my magic resistance save against the Cloudkill trap triggered by the slim, vertical container that held the wand. It has only one charge. Outside I go again, and sell it to Sister Garlena, who dutifully recharges it and sells it back to me. It now has eight charges. On the way out the roar of a leftover Greater Fire Elemental almost caused me to jump out of my skin, but I put it down quickly with the Pulser and took minimal damage. My exploration of the second level complete, I step through the portal to the third.

Day 32
------
I emerge into a hallway that slopes upward into a central arcade. Four symmetrical hallways radiate from it to four equivalent portals, and an ornate rosa ventorum set into the centre of the arcade floor tells me that I have emerged through the north portal. I am invisible when I emerge, and there is an elven man here, who sounds insane from the likes of it. What is he on about? Treasure and parties and demons it seems. Lhaeozarus checks his pocket for a clue to his raving but he carries nothing. I speak to him through her: he calls himself "Yakman" and says that he is the last survivor of a group that made it this far into the Keep. They obviously weren't stopping to pick anything up; they missed a treasure trove upstairs. No idea how they got past the portals either, but I don't have a chance to ask him as the poor fellow thinks that I am a talking delusion and flees through the south portal; I don't blame him. All this time alone and the first thing that talks to him is a ferret. I hurry after him before he gets himself hurt or killed in this dangerous place.

The large, high-ceiling hall I enter does not seem dangerous. A fire burns merrily in a pit, probably lit by Yakman; he seems to be living here in the interim of finding his way out and is in no danger. I search the area. In a lean-to near the fire that seems to be Yakman's home (trapped with Chain Lightning as well, but I resist its magic) I find a journal of his ravings, but an indication seems to be that I should travel east to a demon, then south until I find an obelisk, then north until I find a tree. The portal that brought me here will no longer return me whence I came; this level comprises a sort of maze. As well I find an item called the Sceptre Of Radiance, but this one must be combined with several jewels in order to function, and a set of Bard's Gloves, but they seem to have a purpose other than to be worn only by bards. Perhaps they are Yakman's.

There are two portals here, and when I take the southern one, I appear outside again, on the stairway clinging to the side of Watcher's Keep. A second door has opened, and I may return to the beginning of the maze. First, I speak again to Sister Garlena and sell off a few more collected items: forty Bolts Of Lightning, +3 Arrows and Bolts, three Antidotes, a suit of +1 studded leather, a diamond, a Cloud Giant Strength potion and yet another copy of Elminster's Ecologies; they seem to be everywhere.

I return to the Keep, and try to speak to Yakman and tell him that the south portal is a way out of here so close to him as to be seconds away, but he is lost in his ravings and will not listen. I will let him calm down. I return through the portal at the north end, and reappear in the arcade. The rosa ventorum tells me that I have again come in through the north portal, though I had left through the south one. I will keep this in mind. For now, I follow the advice of Yakman's journal and take the eastern portal.

I really wish that I hadn't; this place is definitely a mage's worst nightmare: a Dead Magic Zone. Not only do all my spells fail, but those of the Cornugon devils here don't. My Stoneskins are stripped away, my invisibility doesn't work, the Ring of Gaxx fails to regenerate me, and my Armour Class changes as one of the protection effects of the devices I wear keeps getting dispelled. Argh. But I bite down and resolve to beat these bastards, and I do. After waiting for them to finish fighting the Balor here so that they are as injured as possible, the first thing that I discover is that all my wands still work properly, so I dig out every wand I can find. The Wand Of Monster Summoning proves useful to distract them from me. I keep a good deal of healing potions in close proximity as well as I will need them. I use the high rate of fire from the Pulser of the Big Metal Rod to take them down. It gives a very high To Hit bonus and it can strike them; they would be immune to the fire damage of the other types of ammunition.

When they are all dead, I check the large rock column in the centre. An inscription in block capitals reads that someone has hidden something away from the evil that dwells all around. It offers nothing more. I dig through my first Bag Of Holding and retrieve the Big Metal Unit. With it on, my armour class falls to a comfortable -17, and I can just fit through the thin hallways that lead to the portals. I may have to use it for the time being, as my magic is denied me here, but I will see whether this is true in other areas.

I am very relieved to find that it isn't. My next stop in this maze contains a Succubus and several Alu-Fiends accompany her. She will help me out of the maze, says she, for a kiss. Yes, pretty lady, and your kiss is death for any mortal who would be foolish enough. The Charm and Domination spells thrown by these harlots of the hells may not have a saving throw and may be more powerful than the usual type, so knowing that undead creatures are immune to mind control, I raise a suitable ally by casting Animate Dead, and a Skeleton Warrior appears. They are rather easily dispatched after this, trying endlessly to dominate the Skeleton Warrior. Several of them drop Oil Of Speed potions, which are always welcome.

I return the way I came in, but.. this not the way I came in. Even more bizarre than a Dead Magic Zone is a Wild Magic Zone, and several Quasits here are taking full advantage of it. Gated demons appear and disappear when itchy. A light shower of cows is forecast and everyone suffers from the hiccups. I grip the Staff to shrug off the madness as best I can. My reliable wands still function properly; I dare not cast a single spell for fear of who-knows-what may happen. Though I try to harbour no grudge against anyone and get along with others as best I can, I feel that the practice of magery might regain some of its status as a noble profession of logic and reason if the practitioners of the... ahem... "New Theories" as the most polite way I can refer to them being demonstrated here in full force were sadly, regrettably, accidentally taken out and shot with +3 arrows one night. Not that I would do such a thing of course. But to purposefully introduce unpredictability when controlling the forces of the universe, and often at the times when it is absolutely least desired and most likely to completely break a delicate spell sequence which must be performed perfectly to obtain the required result, seems stupidity taken to the extreme.

So I fight the madness as best I can, using the Wand of Monster Summoning to raise Gnolls, then Ogres, then Dire Wolves, all the while concentrating on the mad Quasits. Luckily the two Nabassu have taken to battling each other in between bouts of hiccups. Though I am slowed and polymorphed into a wolf I don't let up, and soon the madness has ceased and the place is stilled. Someone has dropped a few nice gems, none of them for the Sceptre, but I still have my sanity and health and that is all that matters.

I'm growing familiar with the navigation here; it's simple to remember that one always appears in the north portal, so I am able to return to what looks like a safe haven. I don't know if Yakman wants the company, so I camp out right on the rosa ventorum in the arcade as if I was going in no particular direction whatsoever, and get all my spells back. I don't know how close I am to using them all up again...

...but I soon find out as I retrace my steps back through the portals to new territory, and find what lives in that new territory: the demon Tanar'ri opponents of the devil Cornugons I had encountered earlier. Their leader is a large Nabassu, there are three Glabrezu with him (looking like miniatures of Demogorgon,) as well as several Quasits, a Yochol Abyssal Drow handmaiden of Lolth, and a Succubus. I must look pathetic to them: one lonely human, poor with weapons, wearing no armour, enough but not many hit points, stepping through the portal into their realm all alone. I doubt they think this after the unassuming human roundly dispatches them back to the Abyss.

I need no more for this than the techniques I have developed recently in dealing with fell creatures. When the Nabassu leader decides that he will not deal with me due to my high reputation, Protection From Magical Weapons is the first casting. Though I am surrounded and would be torn to shreds without it, I can stand in the midst of them and calmly cast Improved Alacrity. I have often gone overboard with excessive Mordenkainen's Swords but this is not one of those times. Rushing to a free area, I raise five of them and set them on the opponents, and a Planetar; I must be draining the cosmos of these beings. Improved Haste is next. I hold off on Tenser's Transformation and instead cast Imprisonment on the leader Nabassu, but something hits me and I waste this nice 9th-level spell, the only low point of the battle. Since they are all probably magic resistant, I cast True Sight to prevent the Succubus from going invisible, Tenser's to improve my melee abilities, and concentrate on the Succubus first as I don't want any of the Swords to get dominated; this isn't supposed to happen but I have seen it happen regardless. The leader summons what looks like a couple of skeletal Abyssal clerics and they join the fray. The Succubus is soon dead and I then help the Swords deal with the Glabrezu, the greatest remaining threat due to their speed and extensive damage abilities.

As the opponents are whittled away, the remainders fall more quickly with more Swords to turn on them. When the Swords vanish, one Glabrezu, those charred-skeleton clerics and a couple of Quasits are all that remain. The Pulser does them in, except for the Quasits. They vanish and reappear so quickly that they are hard to hit, and I already used up True Sight. But they are minor opponents who can't even damage me physically, and with the fast reflexes I can summon when needed their fraction of a second of visibility is enough to smash them down with the Staff. A trapped recessed container holds a few arrows and potions, and the Nabassu dropped its heart and scepter gem. One of three... I have a long series of battles ahead of me in that case.

And I am not mistaken. As soon as I travel south through the next portal, my armour class rises again and I am getting used to these areas enough that I can feel that something is wrong here, as a person with good hearing does on stepping into an area of total silence, which is a rare place indeed; it's another Dead Magic Zone, and two Cornugons, two things that look like Frost Salamanders but fire electrical arrows, and a variation on the Pit Fiend greet me warmly. The Pit Fiend is a fast mover and I am very lucky to be immune to its attacks or I doubt that I would be writing this. I can avoid the Cornugons but the electrical arrows really hurt. I can't read a Protection From Electricity scroll without the effect vanishing shortly thereafter. What I do to get out of this jam is summon a group of monsters with the Wand just as I enter, which distracts the Cornugons from me. I then slip away and out of their sight behind a column and start firing the Pulser at the nasty electrical archers. Meanwhile the Pit Fiend can't injure me but wails in my ear as it tries to. I get horridly injured by the arrows and can't even heal by the regeneration of the Ring Of Gaxx so I gulp healing potions like water. Luckily the Cornugons aren't too bright so forgot about me as they can't see me behind the column. Finally, after more potions than I care to count, the archers are dead. The Cornurgons are easy kills with the Pulser just by keeping away from them, and this Pit Fiend is getting really annoying.

It gets more so. When the Cornugons are dead I can finally deal with the Pit Fiend. It's very fast, and keeps becoming invisible, so I lose sight of it and have to start attacking again, and it regenerates, albeit slowly, but just enough that if I whack it with the Staff, I don't hit it again until it recovers what it lost. So, I turn the Pulser on it instead. I take a large THAC0 penalty for using it point-blank but at least it hits more often than the Staff. I can't back up to get a proper range as the Pit Fiend just catches up to me. I can't Haste, Oil Of Speed is also instantly dispelled, but I find the Improved Haste from the Ring Of Gaxx does stick properly. I use all three of them but still only have this thing to Injured. Time drags on. If I miss too many times, it recovers to Barely Injured. I try the Efreeti Bottle and summon an Efreeti. The Pit Fiend turns on it and smites it. I use the Shakti figurine and become a warrior, clad in armour, with a magical shortsword. The Dead Magic Zone dispels the armour and sword. The glow remains. Great. Finally I stuff my ears with cloth to drown out the screeching and just use the Pulser until the thing finally goes down, which takes well over an hour. My head rings and I have to sit down for a few minutes before continuing. It only drops a scroll of Mantle, which I already know.

Day 33
------
A new day has begun, it would seem, but I don't look forward to facing it and I am in no hurry, so I decide to rest. I am awakened by a wandering Cornugon who casts Aganazzar's Scorcher and Lightning Bolt. I still have Protection From Energy so use it, and the Cornugon can now do perhaps 1 point of damage each time which I quickly heal from. I take it out with the Pulser and rest again.

And I am very glad that I did. The room stuffed with Tanar'ri demons before finds its equivalent here in a room stuffed with their Baatezu devil adversaries; a miniature version of the Abyssal Blood War is encased within the walls of this Keep; they can wipe each other out for all I care and I hope the real Blood War keeps going for as long as it takes to accomplish this; were they not too stupid to realize it, they could cause some serious damage on other planes if they worked together. Their leader is a smaller Ravager or Slayer who identifies himself as Ka'rashur. They are trapped here, and are foolish enough to think that the Tanar'ri are responsible. I have the heart of the Tanar'ri baalor who I slew earlier, and they think it is the key out of here, so I give it to them as it's of no use to me, but it isn't the key out; they give me a Thieves' Hood as a 'reward' for my 'betrayal' of the Tanar'ri and then all turn on me. What? I didn't betray anyone. I was following the directions to finish the maze in order and the Tanar'ri were just the first group I happened to encounter. But devils are like that I guess...

There are quite a lot of them: three Curnugons, Ka'rashur himself, three of those things that look like Frost Salamanders but discharge electrical arrows that I now know to be called Velithuu, several Imps, and a few Bone Fiends join the fun soon after. And in the midst of it is a lost-looking human or formerly human archer. Sigh... there go all my spells again. Protection From Magical Weapons is first, then Improved Alacrity.

I don't raise all the Mordenkainen's Swords at once this time as there are so many enemies that the Swords could vanish before the enemies are dead; three will hold off the pack of them and I can cast the other two later when these three begin to disappear. Elemental magic, fire and electricity, is everywhere, so I cast Protection From Energy and give silent thanks to the Circlet of Netheril that allowed me the extra spell slot to put it in. With the twenty percent resistance I gained in the Abyss augmenting it to ninety-five percent, I can safely ignore all the elemental damage. I also Stoneskin, Blur and drink an Oil Of Speed for longer-lasting quickness.

But for the second time in a row I waste Imprisonment; Ka'rashur is of course immune to it being a Slayer or Ravager but that doesn't stop me from trying. I should have quaffed a Potion Of Insight beforehand as well. By careful manoeuvering I manage to get almost all the enemies beating on the Swords, and I can start picking them off at a distance with the Pulser. One of the Swords is Dominated by the archer, so I throw an Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting in the pack to kill the traitorous Sword and whatever else isn't magic resistant, then cast Tenser's Transformation and pulp the archer with the Staff, and then get a few choice hits in on a couple of Cornugons as they seem the most injured. One of them goes down. Now I concentrate on Ka'rashur and him alone with the Pulser and command the remaining Swords to just attack him. With Tenser's active I hardly miss, the Oil of Speed improves my attacks per round and he is soon dead. Now the Swords are starting to vanish so I finish off the remaining Cornugon; only Imps, Verithuu and Bone Fiends remain. The Imps are easily smashed down with the Staff at one hit apiece, then the Verithuu. The Bone Fiends, as I learned before, can't injure me at all, so I leave them for last. The Oil Of Speed and Tenser's wears off, so as I did before, I raise a Skeleton Warrior who nice low THAC0 will hit them most of the time. They are soon dispatched to wherever they came from.

There isn't much treasure to be had here. A trapped hidden container in the base of a column falls to Knock; it casts Fireball many times after I open it, but I am out of the range of them after the first one; it held a potion or two and some +3 arrows. Ka'rashur's heart fell out of him when he died (fell creatures are strange things) so I retrieve it as it will undoubtedly be useful in future. But he did hold the second of three scepter gems, the real reason I came here. Following Yakman's journal, I should continue south through the next portal. It is the only one other than the one I entered through.

Isn't anyone here glad to see me? The sought obelisk is indeed here, but it is guarded by two Glabrezu spellcasters, who summon hordes of Fire Elementals and Salamanders. I'm very happy that this isn't a Dead Magic Zone, and luckily I memorized Death Fog just for such an occasion of being swamped with summons. It slays all the summons instantly and new ones can be led into the acid and their doom. The Glabrezu, now alone, are very fast enemies and I can barely keep away from them, so I Stoneskin to avoid their attacks and summon a Planetar to keep them busy, then turn the Pulser on them. I bring one down before the Planetar is destroyed (and it helps) and the second falls soon afterwards.

The journal of Yakman now speaks of fleeing into the setting sun and its fire, and then north to a  tree, so I leave through the western portal. I doubt I have seen the last of battle in this place. There are several Tieflings in the next area. Are they friendly? Of course not. Do they immediately want to fight me? Of course. The Fates have arranged things so that the only sentient being I have to talk to is a mad elf. And, of course, it's a Wild Magic Zone. I make the mistake of casting Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting and in a Wild Surge it actually does something useful by entangling one of the Tieflings, so I raise a few monsters with the Wand and put them down with the Scorcher. They have little or none of the immunity to fire from the small fell component of their bloodline. The thief drops some +2 weapons and +3 leather armour.

Finally I can leave this place for a breather; my next stop in the journey west through the portals brings me back to the arcade with the rosa ventorum at its centre. I pass through the southern portal and once again, past mad Yakman, still raving about demons and delusions. I sell off too many items to mention which puts me back at just over three hundred and thirty thousand gold. I sell off and buy back yet another Wand Of Spell Striking that I found to recharge it. Yakman's journal next indicates that I should be heading in a northerly direction to find a tree.

The north portal takes me back to the previous level; this isn't right. I return and this time go one portal further west. There is the tree; this area is completely empty. "But even there the north still calls as to the north I'm free" wrote Yakman. Good, I should be done soon. No, this isn't correct. Going north from the tree leads me back to the arcade, and I know that going north from here leaves the level completely.

But Yakman's journal notes that he rested by the tree. Right; I will rest. I return to the tree, and set up my tent and bedroll as best I can on a stone floor beneath its branches while Lhaeozarus scampers about. I incant my spells silently in my mind leafing through my spellbook and then lay down to rest, gazing at the tree's leaves and thinking of the placidity of nature at peace, and the sap that runs through its veins as the blood does mine, and wondering what it thinks growing in such an alien surrounding with no other trees around to talk to through chemical messages borne on the wind as trees do; I am soon asleep.

Day 34
------
No, that didn't do anything either. I awaken refreshed but nothing has changed here. I try the western exit rather than the northern one and I am back in the Dead Magic Zone where I previously slew the Pit Fiend and allies. Their bodies are the only landmark I have. Yakman's madness finally overtook his sense of direction and while I am certainly not lost, my quarry may be. I will have to blunder through this place as best I can and hope to find someplace new accidentally. I remember the "hand" rules for mazes: that if not specifically designed to foil this technique, one can find one's way out of almost any maze by choosing either the left or right hand and keeping that hand on the wall (or at least imagining it) at all times, thereby tracing the escape route without wandering in circles. I choose the right hand as it is usually out with the Staff so provides a convenient pointer. But the maze is composed of isolated quadrangles so this doesn't work either.

Finally I just wander randomly until I find a direction I can't remember taking before, and I do. From the north portal where the unfortunately slain Tieflings lie, I find another tree. Of course, there are also several Demon Knights and a Cambion there too. I save against their Symbol: Stun, I have too many hit points to be affected by their Power Word: Kill, and raise a Mordenkainen's Sword to keep them off me, then Stoneskin and go to work on them with the Pulser. Amazingly, they are able to kill the Sword with their Swords. I raise another and they eventually kill that one too, but they are much weakened. I throw a Death Fog in the centre of the area and keep them in it taking damage while I skirt the perimeter and pelt them with Pulser ammunition, and soon they are all dead. I am at a loss how they killed my Swords; perhaps they cast Power Word: Kill on them, but they were also able to hit me as well, and yet their weapons are run-of-the mill +1 bastard swords and two handed swords. I don't understand it... but there will always be much that I don't understand.

For the time being, as there is a tree here, I can follow the directions of Yakman which tell me to go north from "the" tree. And a most unpleasant sight meets my eyes when I do: a Demon Wraith has stolen the souls of several adventurers and uses them to attack me as Neb the child-murderer did; this is one of the more disturbing parts of my journey. The floor is coated with traps and they are the kind that don't expire after one triggering. I am able to beat the Demon Wraith by Breaching off his protections, casting Protection From Energy to shrug off the fireballs and other magical damage, then Protection From Magical Weapons to avoid the unfortunate adventurers' attacks. After that, plinking the Demon Wraith over and over with the Pulser interrupts his further spellcasting, and when Protection From Magical Weapons wears off I Stoneskin and keep away from the wraiths. When the Demon Wraith goes down the hold he had on the poor adventurers is released, and they thank me and vanish, and again I am reminded of the ugly depravity of Neb and the children who fought for him against their will, his victims.

Many of the possessions of the adventurers are still here and I collect them: armour, weapons, jewels. I find a Rogue Stone which Cespenar had indicated could be fused with the Quiver Of Plenty to make it better. And a note left by a paladin adventurer named Sir Kalthorine Ut Wistan who passed through this place long ago tells of betrayal by his fellow knights. I have heard of this man; I doubt he was one of the wraiths who were entrapped here but I can only hope.

On the next stop through the portals to the north, I know I have found my destination. A Cambion is here with several Tieflings and two Fell Cats; he identifies the rest as his "servants and pets." Though this looks like yet another battle, I am relieved when he offers his name, Aesgareth, and so I offer mine back; he seems a little more civil than others and I won't hold his heritage against him, as others have done with me. He offers me a gamble, one of many possible but I am only interested in the one that will allow my progression from this level of the Keep: he will wager the gem that I need to complete the Scepter Of Radiance, and I will in turn have to wager the whole Sceptre should I lose, but he promises that I will get it back when he has made his way out of this place. I tell him that I will think about it.

I ponder the wager for a short time. I look the Cambion up and down and try to draw on the sense I have developed from interacting with many different types of beings over the course of years of whether they seem trustworthy. I pace the cavern and note that the Cambion and his allies slew several Cornugons and Imps; therefore he is a fellow of the chaotic background in the Blood War as far as his ancestry goes, and few would trust him. But again, I try to determine a being's intent by their actions and mannerisms, not their heritage. I finally decide that I will trust him; with six allies he could easily have counted a lone Prime as no threat at all when I stepped through the portal had he been of that turn of mind, and I prefer his bearing to other Cambions I have met.

He has a Deck Of Many Things, a rarity among rarities and a sought-after item; he holds it forth and I draw a random card. It casts Slow on me, and without a saving throw. I am relieved that was all I drew. His card summons forth an Adamantite Golem; though these golems take little damage from physical attacks he urges me to stand back and it is slain handily by him and his Tiefling servants. His card trumped mine, and I am supposed to do the honourable thing and surrender the Sceptre and gems to him. I will abide by my commitment, and with an anxious and somewhat fearful heart I press the Sceptre Of Radiance and the two gems I possess into the huge, black-gauntleted hand of Aesgareth, and hope that on my tombstone it will be incised that I died a man of my word, should it come to this. When the third gem snaps into place the Sceptre is completely transformed; it finally bears its name honestly and is alive with energy and light.

He leads his troupe to the awaiting portal and holds the Sceptre close; the portal begins to glow fiercely in blue-white shimmers and emits an audible whine. One at a time they vanish into it: Tieflings, then Fell Cats, lastly Aesgareth... and he is gone. I blink and stare at the portal; nothing changes. But as I reach the pinnacle of the horror that I have been forever cheated, a black-gauntleted hand juts back through the centre of the fury of energies at work in the portal, and holds the Sceptre horizontally by its very tip. I dare not touch it, and it is for the best that I did not or Aesgareth's hand would have become separated from his body in this space had I snatched the Sceptre from him. Slowly the hand withdraws until only the Sceptre is visible, which then suddenly clatters to the stone pedestal. An honourable and honest demon; I fear I shall not meet his like again for a long time, if ever.

But I forget about him and most of the other experiences I have had thus far when I step through the portal. An immense, gleaming hallway, and at its centre at machine like nothing I have ever seen before: brightly coloured, hissing steam, roughly spherical and as large as a house. This is definitely Lum's work. A mage is imprisoned within, and he is another survivor of the adventurers that made it this far. He is as mad as a hatter, but that's what others have said about Lum, though it just isn't the case. When I enter, he is busily creating Githyanki and Mind Flayers and causing them to fight each other, but he tires of this and they run off. Several mechanical arms protrude from the faces of the machine's outer armour and they are busily manipulating levers back and forth. Cables snake from the central device to small fan-like engines of the periphery of the great hall. What a wonderful place...

The wonder is spoiled somewhat by the nasty undead shades at the north end, but I dispose of them quickly by summoning a few distractions and putting them down with the Pulser, concentrating on the Devil Shades first as they can hurt me, and then the Shadow Fiends as they can't, casting Blur to make me more difficult to hit. There are two very large areas gated off from the central hall where the machine sits, at the east and west. I decide to clean them out first, not wanting my exploration of this device spoilt by monsters.

The western gate discloses a mass of Mustard Jellies, five or six of them. Easy prey en masse for the Sorcher. A cabinet at the south holds several type of healing potions. The north end has several cabinets, but they turn out to hold Killer Mimics, beings that disguise themselves as containers to fool adventurers. I summon monsters to take the force of their extremely strong fire and acid attacks, and take them out with the Scorcher while they are busy killing the poor summons. The containers mostly hold ammunition; I place it in the ammo belt and continue on to the eastern gate. Several trolls and Yuan-Ti await, but they fall quickly to the Scorcher and I take only slight damage. I am rushing through this with anticipation of examining Lum's work more closely. Could he have stumbled on something with this so powerful that the gods considered it a threat and locked it away? I pick more gold, ammunition and a couple of scrolls, and another Wand Of Spell Striking out of the containers, shrugging off their traps. There is one further area to the east, with a large circular pool of water in it. Two of the Magic Golems are here as well. As I did before with them, I raise Gnolls with the Wand Of Monster Summoning and they are quickly eliminated by the Gnolls's nonmagical halberds. A hint of blue in the pool catches my eye, and I retrieve a bottle of blue lamp oil. No idea what this is for, so I put it away for now.

And now, finally, I am free to explore what this machine may do, if anything. I pore through the Scroll Cases and Bags of Holding until I have retrieved every note I found from Lum The Mad. I study them all six of them carefully:

"Tough guy? Tough guy? Long red circle is tough guy now!"
"Words to the wise - circle, square, triangle."
"No magic! Long blue green! Back, magic, back!"
"Short medium square makes big muscles."
"The beautiful people are short, red and green."
"Shhh!! Calm before storm! Medium green triangle gets storm in hand."

Each one clearly contains three parameters: long or short or a shape or two or three, or a colour. These must be some sort of a code. Disregarding that part of each, I see: tough guy, words to the wise, no magic, big muscles, beautiful people, and storm in hand. Already four of them are becoming clear: they sound like attributes. If "big muscles" is Strength, then "tough guy" would be Constitution, "beautiful people" Charisma and "words to the wise" nothing but Wisdom. Ahhh, by that reasoning then "No magic" would be Magic Resistance. But what is Storm in Hand? Is this power of the machine what made the gods of Toril lock it away, forever imprisoned in this dumping ground for multiplanar troublemakers? If it can change a person's attributes, perhaps someone in the cosmos thought that this would make certain people too powerful. I was able to do this many times previously myself with the tomes I found scattered throughout the areas around Baldur's Gate. There were several for Wisdom, and one each for each other attribute a person has. But those tomes were very rare, some perhaps unique. Can the machine do it over and over again?

There is only one way to find out. I approach the machine and check it carefully. Mad Carston the mage is the "Lord of the Level" and likes to electrocute people who ask questions he doesn't want to answer, so I ignore him for now. He doesn't remember any other life before being trapped in this intricate cage, immortal but powerless outside of this area and unable to leave. I find that I am unable to operate the machine. I will have to return later. I check the area more carefully this time. In my haste, I had missed a second western area behind another gate, in which I find several Yuan-Ti including a mage; they fall in seconds to the Scorcher. Two rows of three torches, bronze bowls elevated on metal legs, stand before a locked gate. I remember the blue oil I had picked up recently and this must have been for it. However, there is naught else in this area. There are two gates at the north and south from here, and it is clear that I will have to go into them but I am not sure which one I like least; one seems to be the lair of Illithid and another Githyanki, where the beings conjured by the mad Carston go to live when he tired of their petty battles. I decide I will check the Illithid lair first.

Before entering, I gulp a Potion Of Genius to raise my Intelligence and offset any of the Illithid's drain of it. The familiar garish alien decoration is soon apparent, and several Umber Hulks and an Illithid await in the first circular area I come to. A Cloudkill in the centre disposes of the Umber Hulks, and I can easily melee the Illithid; it doesn't hit me at all. When it flees in terror, I pick it off with the Pulser. I run into a few more Umber Hulks and lead them back into the first Cloudkill and their destruction, and melee an Ularthid. It gets one hit on me. In a container, I find yet another of Lum's "notes." This one says: "Quick and nimble - quick blue square! Nimble and short." This must be one for Dexterity, fitting the pattern of the others.

There is a human here, or what appears to be. He is sleeping on the floor in a cell in the Illithid lair. He awakens when I speak; he is nearly dead. I an do nothing for him, he dies shortly thereafter. He was with Carston's group when they first entered this place; Carston decided to fiddle with the machine without knowing what it did. He trapped himself within it, and further random tinkering merely made the problem worse, gating demons and casting fireballs that killed his apprentices. Now I know why asking about them is a sore spot for him. I don't get to find out how to either bypass the glass or free Carston, or kill him if he forces it to come to that.

When I slay another Ularthid in this area, he drops the second half of a rod, the first half of which I found earlier. The two halves fit together neatly and now it is left to me to find the use for it. In a northwestern area a central pool holds the second of these coloured lamp oils; this one is red. With a rumble, the vertical Illithid sarcophagi open and two Vampiric Illithid appear. I had bypassed one of these earlier. They regenerate quickly and would Level Drain were I not immune to it with the Amulet Of Power, which still nothing has persuaded me to remove. They don't drain my intelligence, though. I cast Tenser's Transformation and try to put up with being nibbled, but I don't have any more Improved Haste available and they regenerate as fast as I can damage them even hitting them with every swing. Animate Dead provides an ally with a strong magical sword that can damage them, and while they pick on me the Skeleton Warrior accelerates the damage on them and soon they are dead.

I explore the area, but it has nothing more to offer me. I dread crossing the vast hall to the Githyanki zone but it appears that this is what I must do. They are as savage as I remember them, with their unnerving wailing during battle, but I didn't have Mordenkainen's Sword or the Big Metal Rod available then. With a Sword to distract the first group I meet, they are not difficult at all. The only ones that seem to be able to hit me are the aptly named Anti-Paladins, but their Unholy Reaver swords fuse to them when they die and can't be picked up. I concentrate on them first, and then the Knights and Warriors, whose normal swords can't hit me. I save against all their stun magics. When the first sword expires, I raise another while pressing further into their complex. Finally I meet their Captain, who is so pleased to hear that I already disposed of their Illithid enemy, saving them the trouble, that he decides to kill me. Did I expect anything different from the Gith? He never gets close; the Scorcher cuts him down where he stands and I don't get to feel the loving touch of the +4 named longsword that he wields.

I find several interesting items here interspersed amongst the heaps of armour, potions, and two-handed swords, which I dutifully pack away anyways, not wanting anything to go to waste as long as I can carry it. One of the items is secreted in the "teeth" of a Spelljammer stowed away here: the clasp of the cloak of Montolio, tutor of Drizzt. I have been looking for this to complete the cloak; Cespenar will be able to do the honours. Another coloured oil is found; this one is purple. And most interesting of all is a scribbled note from one of the apprentices of Carston which details how he has hidden a small magical mallet, which in six strikes can shatter the glass of Lum's machine, as he did not wish Carston to be freed. As well there is a set of flint and tinder to light the torches lined up in front of the large locked gate near Lum's machine, and another "note" from Lum: "Smarty smarty. You long circle the blue." Intelligence is always helpful.

Almost hidden on the west wall is a stairway going downwards. Wondering what could be there, I descend. Ah, a crypt... oh crap! There's a floating head that looks very familiar here. I have just blundered into a Demi-Lich's lair. I cast Spell Immunity:Abjuration at roughly the speed of light, and ponder in the very limited time I have left alive should I perform poorly what to do. I have five scrolls of Protection From Undead still, and I doubt I will run into that many undead between now and my inevitable confrontation with Melissan. I will read one if it looks like Spell Immunity is going to wear off before the Demi-Lich is nothing but shattered bone fragments; knowing the power and versatility of Spell Immunity I have memorized two of them.

But I won't let that happen if I can help it. I cast Haste on myself, the last resort without using yet another Oil Of Speed that I am running out of, then Energy Blades. I need to rest soon anyways and I absolutely must throw every piece of damage I can at this floating head lest I find myself saying "hi" to the lithosphere for a few million years; no one will ever decide to visit this uncharted crypt in a desolate part of an inaccessible section of a no-parole prison built by the gods and decide to cast Freedom for no reason, I can tell you. I unload the Energy Blades as fast as I can and then use Draw Upon Holy Might to top my Strength to 25 and start whacking the Demi-Lich. I can do at most 2 points of damage per hit, but after the Energy Blades it's already Injured. It's still not fast enough... it doesn't regenerate but I can't damage it fast enough to prevent Spell Immunity from running out. And it does... oh no oh no... can I get another one up immediately, before another Imprisonment comes? Yes! I silently thank the Robe of Vecna giving me instantaneous casting times for many spells. I cast the second Spell Immunity: Abjuration and resume whacking. But I still won't make it... the Demi-Lich is Badly Injured but I am not damaging it quickly enough. I need another good spell... Spell Trap! I raise the Spell Trap of the Staff Of The Magi and it catches an Imprisonment or two, and I get Energy Blades back. I cast that, put some distance between myself and the Demi-Lich to avoid the point-blank penalty and hurl them as though my life depended on it, and it does! The Demi-Lich is Near Death, and I get a few more good hits in with the Staff...

...and then I am naked. Exposed! My last Spell Immunity has expired and I am helpless... and the world seems to have had a Slow spell cast on it; it moves in a ridiculously sluggish way. My back tensed like cables, arms stretched back gripping the Staff as if it is keeping me from falling into the Abyss itself; the glow in the Demi-Lich's eyes arising as its lower jaw drops, and I see the fulmination of magical energy and know that the end is near, and like a spring unwinding I bring all the tension to bear and the Staff head descends on that floating menace to everything reasonable...

With a crack, and a clunk, the Demi-Lich tumbles to the floor. A piece falls from the cranium of the skull and the jaw dislocates and separates. It is dead for now. I keep from collapsing only by gripping the Staff tightly and hyperventilating; my heart must be doing three hundred beats a minute and I am afraid of ironically dying even though I have won... I have won the first time with no preparations and I think of how many poor souls might be Imprisoned here that I could have joined. Just the horror of being Imprisoned in a place so isolated, and my close brush with it, causes me to go further in my reparations than I did before when I battled Kangaxx; in a city full of archmagi one would eventually be freed.

I only have three Freedom scrolls but will probably never need them for companions, so I read one, just to be sure. I don't worry about being able to cast this spell if I ever really need it as I long-ago scribed it so can be ready to cast it after eight hours' rest at any time. No one appears when it is cast, and I will sleep soundly knowing I did this. To prevent the Demi-Lich from ever rising anew, I carefully gather the pieces of the broken skull and jawbone. Without their occupant giving them their great resistance to damage, they crush easily as I use the Staff like a great pestle on the hard steps of the crypt, having placed the pieces on an unrolled scroll so that not a single fragment would be lost. This completed, I search through my first Bag Of Holding for the Elven holy water I purchased in Saradush. I still have a few vials of it. The vials are not large enough, so I break out a soup bowl from my pack, fold the flattened scroll slightly and pour the fractured Demi-Lich pieces in. Decanting and adding the Elven holy water, there is a visible discharge of magical luminescence. I stir and stir until the Demi-Lich fragments are completely saturated with holy water. Finally, I cast Dispel Magic on the bowl. The colour of the fragments noticeably lightens to bleached bone; the dispelling was successful. The Demi-Lich is really dead now. I don't leave for a few minutes, relaxing after my efforts, and listening to the hiss and crackle of the eternal flame that burns on the crypt, petting Lhaeozarus, and trying to forget how close I came to an eternity of entrapment.

I dump the contents of my bowl into the crypt as a final burial place for the Demi-Lich, whoever he or she may have been in a life that ended centuries or millennia ago, but not before removing what I find in it: a named +4 dagger that can cause the wielder to become invisible. Not many weapons do I find that I can actually use, so I heft it and test the balance carefully. I also find twenty thousand gold pieces, the most I have ever found in a single place, and I somehow feel that I earned it, every piece. I will have to remember to thoroughly rinse this bowl before I eat from it again; I don't know if dispelled Demi-Lich dust is poisonous but I have no desire to find out.

For now, I continue onwards. There is only one remaining area in the Githyanki lair that I have not explored, and its resident is no Githyanki, judging by the large dragon head of stone mounted to the arch (how do dragons do their decorating, I wonder... their lairs are always ever so nice.) I am almost completely out of spells, and battling a dragon is not an option right now, but dragons are intelligent creatures and usually willing to talk first.

Indeed, Saladrex is certainly willing to talk... I think that he misses company being down here all alone with only barbaric Githyanki as occasional visitors (or meals,) so I humor him with titles such as "oh, mighty Saladrex" and let him answer all my questions as best I can. He knows of the crystal mallet that I must find in order to shatter the glass keeping Carston inside, and overheard the Githyanki captain say before that the Illithid held it, but does not know where it is now. He also knows of the rows of torches and coloured oils, and that the machine of Lum is possibly a way to the next level.

He is friendly enough, and very polite for a Red Dragon, so I leave Saladrex alone, though he is foolish enough to hint that he has a large treasure cache amassed from the machine's creations that have been brazen enough to attack him. I remember the Abyssal test where a dragon would hand over a Tear Of Bhaal just by asking, and how I had stayed my hand there and benefitted from doing so; I depart Saladrex's lair for now. I must have missed something in another area; I will check the Illithid lair very thoroughly and have Lhaeozarus hunt for secret doors.

But first, I will use the opportunity presented by the Portals and take the one that returns me to the outdoors, and sell off items that I have collected. I will also visit Cespenar and see what he has to offer me. I decide to do this first, to avoid selling anything that I might need. I end up spending forty thousand gold, but for my troubles I receive four fine pieces each of which would be a lifetime's achievement for their owners, or a lifetime's study for an enchanter of how Cespenar in seconds can duplicate a complex series of enchantments, components and months of preparation, which is what these items usually take in the crafting. With a Rogue Stone, the Quiver Of Plenty is now upgraded to produce an unlimited number of +2 arrows, Montolio's cloak is fused with its clasp and is now a potent item for Rangers, the White Dragon scales found beside the body of one of the unfortunate Wraithed adventurers is forged into magical White Dragon Scale armour with a -2 Armour Class that can cast Cone Of Cold for the wearer, and most potent of all, the Angurvadal longsword is transformed with the vial of liquid mercury into a +5 enchanted blade that makes one as strong as a Fire Giant as the girdle I wear does, and confers immunity to Level Drain when wielded. This weapon alone would take a master enchanter literally years to produce, but Cespenar takes no longer than with other forgings, as if the weapons are already made in some alternate reality that only he has access to.

But for every item I can improve, there is yet another I cannot yet. The Dagger Of The Star requires five Star Sapphires to become more potent, the Bard's Gloves several expensive gems, the Thieves' Hood needs a Ring Of Invisibility and an Antidote potion. I will have to keep these things in mind. I carefully place the newly constructed items for safekeeping in a container here and go to find Sarevok. He is resting; he looks very peaceful. The nightmare that was his life is over. I don't disturb him. Cespenar assures me that everything has been very quiet and as blissful as the Abyss can be in my absence; that is enough for me and I return to the Keep.

And now it is down to selling off a huge amount of accumulated items. One hundred and fifty +3 arrows, eighty +1 arrows and bolts, seventy +3 bolts, sixty +2 bolts, forty Arrows Of Ice, Piercing and Biting and Bolts Of Lightning, twenty-one suits of plate mail, twenty +1 darts, fifteen two-handed swords, nine Antidotes (I make sure to keep one for Cespenar's "recipe,") eight longswords and Potions Of Healing (these once-useful potions are now far too weak to be of any assistance,) five bastard swords, four short bows, Potions Of Invisibility and +1 two-handed swords, three more copies of Elminster's Ecologies (I have no idea why there are so many of them; must be very popular,) two scrolls of Summon Hakeashar, Identify, Sphere Of Chaos and Grease, two +1 bastard swords and Wands Of Magic Missiles, one scroll each of Protection From Normal Weapons, Mantle, and Conjure Lesser Air Elemental, a suit of +1 plate mail and full plate mail, an Adventurer's Robe, a Potion Of Fire Giant Strength, a Wand Of The Heavens (I have two, so sell the one with the lesser charge) and a host of normal weapons and assorted minor gems, though I find one is a Laeral's Tear that fetches a good coin. I am back to three hundred and forty-six thousand gold pieces even after all the upgrading I did in the Abyss. Cespenar is an expensive butler.

I return as planned to the lair of the Illithid, and Lhaeozarus goes to work. My Skeleton Warrior is still there awaiting my return, too. I have cleaned the place out completely it seems. There is a trap here that persistently casts something on me, but I can shrug off anything with a saving throw. I already have Lhaeozarus looking for traps as she will find secret doors at the same time. She finds the trap, and she is actually able to disarm it. She never ceases to amaze me and I pat her head and smile. But I find nothing more. There are no secret doors here. It is late at night, I require rest, and I am out of spells. Tired of being inside for the time being, I return to the outdoors and make camp near the foot of the obelisk and rest well.

Day 35
------
I speak to Saladrex and Carston both upon awakening but they have nothing new to offer me, so I pace the area of Lum's machine several times back and forth to the east and west sides looking for anything that I have missed, before I realize that I have been walking over the answer all of this time: like wide teardrops, three decorative tiles set into the floor on each gated area are red, red and purple in order on the west side and blue, purple and red on the east. This would be the order to light the torches in, though I had thought that more oil would be required.

I break out the three containers of oil, carefully pour a small amount into each torch in order, then strike flame into the first with the tinder and flint. Carrying a small burning splint of tinder to each torch, they are all soon alit. When the last torch is lit, there is a rumbling and the huge gate flies open. There is a further gate behind it. I Stoneskin before entering it, and I am glad I did so. As the gate swings open I see the guardians of this place and the two huge iron safes that they protect. Two minotaurs and several Frost Salamanders converge on me. I raise a single Mordenkainen's Sword and keep away from them as best I can. Between the Scorcher, Sword and Staff they all soon fall; I Magic Missile the larger of the two minotaurs to finish the process. They both carried +3 battle axes, but one of the larger minotaur's is a named axe called the Axe Of Unyeilding.

One of the safes is trapped, Lhaeozarus tells me, so I clench my teeth that it isn't Maze Or Imprisonment and Knock it open. When I crack the door open whatever it is gets blocked by my Magic Resistance. The sought crystal mallet is inside, along with quite a few gold pieces and a couple of scrolls, including the page to the Golem Manual that I wanted very much: summoning a Clay Golem. I will try to have Cespenar convert the Golem Book for this one as a Clay Golem is a far better ally, being resistant to many types of damage. The second safe is not trapped but holds nothing memorable.

I quickly return to Lum's machine, bristling with anticipation... I'm not quite sure what Carston will do when I release him, but being a fellow mage if he decides to turn on me I will be more than equipped to handle it. I firmly tap the glass six times with the crystal mallet and it dissolves into dust. Carston tumbles to the ground, shocked and stupefied. Rather than turning on me, he begs for his life. I know that he arrived in the cage by accident who-knows-how-long ago, so I tell him that I should kill him for what he did to his apprentices in his futile tries to escape, but that I will be a better man than he could be capable of and let him go, which he does. Without the wardstone of Helm I have no idea how he will escape this place but this is not my problem.

I inspect the inner workings of the machine's control panel. The main one has three sets of controls: circular, square and triangular buttons, red, blue and green dials, and short, medium and long levers. I will confine myself to exactly following the eight notes from Lum I found lest I try a bad combination and end up trapped as Carston was, or worse. So, I work through the notes in the order in which I found them.

"Tough guy? Tough guy? Long red circle is tough guy now!" I hesitantly pull the long lever. Nothing happens except a slight change in the sounds coming from the machine. Next, I twist the red dial, and again the sounds change slightly. Something is building up, like that first Magic Missile... and I scrunch my eyes closed when I gently depress the circular button... I feel something change in me. Yes! I was right... this is the Constitution change. My Constitution has improved by one to twenty, and I would now regenerate naturally without any items. Wonderful... I file this note away. To try the same combination again would be a dangerous risk, and I will file away the rest as I try them. Greed inevitably ends badly...

"Words to the wise - circle, square, triangle." All three of them are buttons, and in the same order they appear in. When all three are pressed, my Wisdom is increased to 13. Funny thing; the buttons are the most natural thing to use in the layout of the controls. Perhaps this was done deliberately so that an unwise person who pressed all the buttons in order while playing with the machine would become wise enough to know not to play with it further!

"No magic! Long blue green! Back, magic, back!" Pulling the long lever, then twisting the blue and green dials improves my Magic Resistance by ten percent. Very nice for a wizard to have this in confrontations with other wizards.

"Short medium square makes big muscles." Knowing what this will do, I first pull off the Girdle of Frost Giant Strength so that I can measure its effects. Pulling the short then medium levers and pushing the square button raises my unaccentuated Strength from nineteen to twenty.

"The beautiful people are short, red and green." Pulling the short lever, followed by twisting the red and green dials raises my Charisma from fourteen to fifteen. I still have the Ring Of Human Influence if required for those critical times.

"Shhh!! Calm before storm! Medium green triangle gets storm in hand." Now this is the one that I couldn't fit into the schema of the rest of them before, so I am anxious to try it. The medium lever, green dial and triangular button are tried, and my pack feels slightly heavier. I check it and I find a nice +3 mace called the Storm Star. Of course I can't use it, but it's certainly a fit item for my museum: this may be an original Netherese artifact and is potently charged with electrical energy.

"Quick and nimble - quick blue square! Nimble and short." This one is slightly ambiguous due to the arrangement of the page. Is it made to be read left to right strictly in row order (blue, square, short,) or is it arranged in columns (short, blue, square)? Judging by the others, I go with the former and I am relieved to get that point of Dexterity back that I sacrificed in the Abyss.

"Smarty smarty. You long circle the blue." What else but Intelligence, a mage's meat and drink and mine increases to twenty. I won't have to worry about misreading scrolls very often, though it's still best to use a Potion Of Genius and be sure of it.

And that is that for the rewards of the Machine of Lum the 'Mad', but I have still one more task to complete of it. When I freed Carston, he presented me with his journal. He was able to find the code to open the portal at the north end of the hall though he could not break the glass cage and use it, and so I duplicate this with the triangular button, red dial and medium lever. The portal is opened, and I can descend further into the bowels of this place. But before leaving, I carefully collect all eight of Lum's notes and Carston's journal, and place them carefully into the chest nearest the machine, so that others who might find it can both benefit from its powers and continue further into this place should they so desire. I don't leave just yet, though I could. Instead, I return to the Githyanki quarter, and pass beneath the dragonhead arch.

Saladrex is still there, more lonely as ever. Even the yowling barbaric Githyanki may have been better company than none, but not much. I explain to him that the portals are open, and if he wants to leave that he should do so; the Githyanki are dead and Carston isn't around to be conjuring any more of them, or any more munchies.

I've not seen a dragon look saddened before and it isn't a pleasant sight. I continue... I tell him that he's not bad for a Red Dragon, so he should fly away from here and settle down somewhere with better company. His jaw opens but no words or flames emerge, just silence. And on that I whirl on my heel and climb the steps to the Githyanki lair and beyond. I am sure he'll take the hint.

Then I step through the east portal and know that the fun of Lum's machine is over, and the grimness of my mission has returned. A vast cathedral-like ceiling hangs over me, and in the centre of the stone floor a metal plate, emblazoned with the seal of Helm, twice as wide as I am tall is fastened to the floor by radial metal clamps; clearly it covers a pit or passage, and clearly the Imprisoned One is within there. I am closer to my goal than I dared imagine, barring unforseen difficulty on this level. The danger I face could not be driven home more sharply than by the effort that went into this construct: three large hydraulic locking seals surround the metal disc, each requiring a special key, and a master cylinder at one end controls the other three when they have been locked or unlocked to withdraw the clamps holding the plate in place. I gently test the metal of the plate with several gemstones; it is harder than Adamantium; nearly as hard as diamond. No known metal has this degree of hardness. What am I getting myself into?

But before worrying about this, I must concentrate on what this level of the Keep may hold for me. I wonder how long it has been since another sentient mortal has stood here, yet no dust has accumulated and everything looks new though the time may be measured in centuries. Resolving myself to see what this place holds for me to do, I check the area.

The first thing I encounter to the south is the ghost of a Helmite, a follower of Helm. I have little to fear from it if this is the case. It guards three doors to the south. Each of these contains a test which I must complete in order to determine if I may progress; from what he says these tests are not just of a physical nature but will test other parts of me as well. I will note this for now. There are also two other very large doors to the north here but their purpose was not made clear to me.

I try the first one; and several of those awful Mutated Spiders attack me. I cast Fireshield: Blue to cool them off and send a few Frag Grenades at them. When they reach me I melee them with the Staff and their rate of attack means that they injure themselves on the numbing cold of the shield more than I do with the Staff. Three of them die outright and I gulp a healing potion and try to ignore the pain. I do in two with the Staff while manoeuvering to try to keep only one attacking me at once and soon they are all dead.

There is another smaller copy of the large metal plate in the floor here, and four empty containers surround it. An interrupted scroll here indicates that there is a colour combination that will unlock the four seals. I have no idea what this is for, but I will soon find out I imagine. I will check the other gate first.

There are a plethora of golems beyond it: two Ice, two Iron and a Sand Golem charge forward, and meet a Mordenkainen's Sword instead of me. I Improved Haste and with the strength of 22 provided by the Girdle, the Staff working double time and with all the golems concentrating on the immune Sword they are dispatched in roughly one minute. An altar at one end seems to require the skull of a warrior to function. I will keep this in mind.

For now, there is an inviting portal to the outdoors here, and so I make my now-routine journey outward to Sister Garlena to sell off items that I don't need or can't use. Eighty +1 bullets, twenty +3 arrows and bolts, five helmets and halberds, three bastard swords and short bows, two +3 battle axes, a long sword and several gems including a Black Opal. Nothing major, but coin is coin and I'd do it just to spend a little time outdoors.

Then, off to the Abyss and a chat with Cespenar. I could upgrade the Storm Star mace if I found a certain ore. But I can immediately upgrade the Axe Of Unyielding with the Baalor Claw I found a long time ago. I do so. It only costs five thousand gold but the finished axe is worth far more than some of the other upgrades. I hold it in awe... it is now of +5 enchantment, gives a bonus to Armour Class when held and regenerates three hit points every round (more than the Ring Of Gaxx does)... and it's vorpal; it will slice an enemies' head cleanly off one of every ten hits. Not only one of the most potent axes I have yet seen, but of hand held weapons of any sort. An acolyte could study this weapon for years and not duplicate it. To test an old saw about these sorts of blades, I find a relatively clean and pliable cloth rag, not wishing to sacrifice one of my handkerchiefs. Holding the axe perpendicularly with the blade upward, I gently drop the unfurled cloth over it... and it is sliced neatly in half by its own weight. I rap the very edge of the blade lightly with a stone, enough to make a barely visible dent; not only is the stone sliced but as I watch, the dent repairs itself; the axe is magically, perfectly sharp to the limits that enchanted steel can be sharpened. I gently and respectfully place it amidst the other items for my future museum, being careful that the deadly edge does not rest near anything else.

Unfortunately, the Golem Manual that was upgraded to summon a Juggernaut can no longer be upgraded to summon a Clay Golem, which I would much prefer. The Juggernaut is too easily injured to be of much use to me; I tried it once or twice to test it. Although it is immune to weapons of less than +2 enchantment, everything I run into seems to be that powerful. The Clay Golem would have been immune to all piercing, slashing and missile weapons, a far more useful ally in the correct context; I can't have it all. I will do without.

I try to enjoy a meal in the comforts of 'home' as much as this place has been a home away from home for me. Sarevok notes that I look troubled and I explain to him what I must do; he understands as he has had similarly unpleasant tasks to complete in the past, though I hesitate to ask him what the nature of the tasks was. My newly-found brother has a great inner strength that I have sometimes shared; it may be common to all the children of Bhaal should they choose the lifestyle that I have, or have it thrown upon them.

When I am done, I pay my respects to Sarevok, and advise him that should I not return again, to open the container in the northeast of this Abyssal area and take what he will from it, for sale or for use, and I note this to Cespenar as well should he intervene. I may not survive the next day or two. I also request that Imoen be located as only I can summon her through the Spirit Of Fate and given anything that I have collected that she can use. I make sure to leave all remaining valuables that are not useful to me behind in the Abyss, though I wonder if this small region of it would exist when I am dead. Then, I return without further delay to the Keep.

The three tall wrought-iron gates guarded by the ghostly Helmite loom before me, and I must choose one. I decide to do them in left-to-right reading order; this makes sense. I swing open the wrought-iron gate; it is not rusty whatsoever and opens easily. A darkened stairway leads downward. I expect something horrendous will leap out at me...

...but as I felt when I swam through the black tunnels of the lair of Abazigal, I am not prepared for the surrealism of appearing in a bright sitting-room, with a comfortable sofa, and an imp who riddles. His first riddle is of a child who has the same number of sisters as brothers, but each brother has twice as many sisters as brothers. How many children in total? It must be an odd number for the child to have the same number of each gender of sibling. It doesn't seem to have an answer if the child in question is male. Female then... three doesn't work, five doesn't work, seven works. I answer seven, and I am correct, but it doesn't end there. I now have to play the fiendish "coins game" with the imp. It has eleven coins and each of us can draw one to three of them. The loser picks the last coin.

Clearly the trick here is in the planning but I'm still not wise enough to plan ahead, but I am intelligent enough to use another's planning against it. I let the imp play first and forfeit the first game, then I play "tit-for-tat" and use its own sure-fire winning tactics against it when I insist on going first the next time, and I win. The imp is gone and the Helmite spirit appears to congratulate me on defeating its guile. Then it is gone too and I am alone in the surreal sitting room. I search the cabinet here and find a few healing potions... and a Disintegrate trap, but nothing with a saving throw can affect me anymore.

So I stride confidently into the next challenge, and find out that it's not the same at all. This is a Green Dragon, and unlike Saladrex, this isn't a nice one. He gives me all of one sentence before turning hostile. I throw a few Gnolls at him but he decides to breathe on us... ouch. I gulp a Superior Healing potion and raise a Planetar and two Mordenkainen's Swords and cast Protection From Energy on myself while the Planetar casts Globe of Blades and melees the dragon. As usual, I overdo it: the Planetar's Vorpal blade does the dragon in rather quickly, then it gets stuck in the foliage. No matter, and I retrieve a few hundred gold and a named katana called Hindo's Doom from the dragon's corpse. I stored a desiccated hand of Hindo in the Abyss; I believe that I have found yet another object for Cespenar to work on. As well, he drops the skull of a warrior required for the altar near the seals. And the Helmite appears to congratulate my valor.

The last challenge of the three pits me against a group of Orcs. Two of them are mages. I haven't encountered an Orcish mage before but given their naturally reduced intelligence they probably won't cast spells of very high level, and I am correct. Still they must appear godly to the other Orcs, though I must start my own small local version of the Time Of Troubles with them. A Cloudkill in the midst of them is all I need to begin the process; both mages end up standing in it. I disregard the poison and charge through it to whack them and dispel their Mirror Image. The rest only carry normal weapons as far as I can tell so the mages are all I concentrate on, and they are soon down. The Frag Grenades take out the rest. The Helmite appears and I have "survived the horde." I received a golden key inscribed "Courage." This will unlock one of the seals. I have no idea what to expect from this, but I return with the skull of the warrior to the altar. I place it there...

... and I am no longer in the same place. I don't think that I am in any place at all. This matrix of tiny cubical rooms interconnected by hallways is like nowhere that I have ever been before, and it is supported by nothing; around it including above and below is only blackness and void. I cannot move at all; I am locked rigidly into place by an unseen force and even my breathing has stopped though I don't feel a need to gasp for breath. A blurry man stands before me, his form shifting and wavering. He is the Spirit Warrior. I must guide him through simple commands to perform actions to complete his quest. A lookalike to the rosa ventorum of the maze level is here to provide direction. But the worst part is that not only am I not in control of my own body anymore, but also not of my own lifeforce. It seems to be shared with the Spirit Warrior and I somehow know that should I let him die, I will soon follow. And then my vision shifts and I see myself through the eyes of the Spirit Warrior, a mage standing so still as to be little more than a statue overlaid on my own vision of him and increasing in intensity until it is all I see.

I wonder before I begin why this test would be here, what it might determine in the potential person who made it this far. I suppose that it would prevent someone who was an insane powermonger from passing; such a person would never be able to handle not being in control of themselves and having to ensure the pain suffered by their underlings that they so willingly sacrifice, or may find it difficult to care enough about the Spirit Warrior and sacrifice him, and therefore themselves, foolishly. I will try to keep the Spirit Warrior alive.

And I do... first heading to the east, and then exploring, slowly from there. I am sure to check every room that he passes through and pick up anything that may prove helpful. I find a scroll with a picture of a gibberling on it. I/he take a couple of knocks from a Skeleton who arises when I/he inspect a chest, but through finding and using a couple of healing potions, using the scroll to frighten away a Gibberling who attacks, fighting a couple of simple enemies (a War Dog and Goblin) and finding a Wand Of Missiles, I am able to make it to the final of the tiny rooms: a crypt. The archway to the crypt warns that there is no turning back once entering, but being well-prepared the Spirit Warrior is able to enter and defeat the Mummy within using the Wand Of Missiles on it first. I am glad that he carries an enchanted weapon. I/he takes no damage in the last battle, and when the mummy is gone, the symbol of Helm hung in this place glows brightly.

I am returned, unharmed, to the altar. I have gained a second key. It is inscribed "Spirit." The final of the three seal keys awaits me, so I return to the smaller copy of the seal with four large vertical tubes surrounding it, of four colours, shining like opaque coloured glass. When I push each coloured button and retrieve each ball, a different type of enemy appears: first hobgoblins, then a lone female mage, then those awful Mutated Spiders, and then four Skeleton Warriors. Aside from the spiders, none of them are very difficult opponents compared to others I have found in this area and the Keep. I place each coloured sphere in the matching glass tube, and a key, the final key, appears: Wisdom.

I depart again to Sister Garlena's store before progressing further, selling off sixty-four +1 arrows, forty +3 arrow and bolts, twenty Acid Arrows and Bolts of Lightning, nine bastard swords, five maces, four +1 two-handed swords, long bows, helmets and plain spears (no idea why I kept those,) three light crossbows, two scrolls of Friends and Shocking Grasp, a Potion of Strength, a suit of studded leather, a short bow, a scroll of Protection From The Elements, Invisible Stalker, Conjure Lesser Air Elemental and Identify, and several very minor gems. Not much but still worthwhile. I know that there are at least two items that I can have Cespenar work his skills on, so I return to the Abyss.

I am able to fuse Hindo's Hand with the katana called Hindo's "DOOOOOM" as Cespenar puts it, and form a +4 katana that grants immunity to death magic, casts Greater Restoration and adds ten percent magic resistance. An excellent piece. And, the fusion of Ixil's Spike and Ixil's Nail produces a +6 spear whose spearhead will magically detach, pinning its opponents and continuing to damage them. Clearly this is the most potent spear I have ever seen or heard of and I will keep it well. I return to the Keep and ponder the three locks.

I didn't imagine that I would still be fighting things to get out of this level, or that there were yet more guardians to deal with, but there are... inserting the one of the keys into a randomly chosen seal lock and turning it firmly unlocks it, but also produces a lich named Azamantes and three Flaming Skulls. The Skulls move very quickly so I draw them off and change rings to the Ring Of Fire Control. I make several magic resistance saves with my improved resistance from Lum's machine, and the Skulls' Fireshields are easily dispelled with the Staff. When they are gone, I deal with Azamantes. I distract him with the Wand Of Monster Summoning and a contingency of his goes off; Protection From Magical Weapons is a hard thing to remove from a lich as he'll just be immune to Breach. I try just to make sure. So I wait while he battles the Ogres; I am very glad to have raised them as he Imprisons one, and then when Protection From Magical Weapons wears off I give him a tap with the Staff. Another contingency, another Protection From Magical Weapons, more ogres. The lich's spells are progressively weaker, and finally he runs out all together. I Staff him a few times and then turn the Pulser on him at range. I find a +2 staff called the Serpent Staff on his body which can poison enemies with every hit and never run out of venom, and a +4 sling that can make its own bullets, but nothing replaces the Staff Of The Magi unless it's godly.

Hoping that the next battle, if any, will be not too difficult, I insert the next key and twist it firmly. Six blurry warriors and a sorcerer named Aurumach Rilmani appear. I lead off the warriors and battle them; they cast priest spells and Ice Storm repeatedly. The Scorcher does a few in, the Staff a couple more. I make many magic resistance saves so I don't take too much damage, and I have well over a hundred healing potions should I require them.

Finally to Aurumach Rilmani. He's a pain... he doesn't seem to run out of Cones Of Cold, Mirror Image, and has an electrical Fireshield that can't be Breached. No matter how many monsters I raise, he never runs out of Death Spells. Finally I just cast Tenser's Transformation and take the damage, knowing that it's off the bonus hit points, as I can then hit him with every strike with the Staff dispelling his protections as fast as he raises them. He falls in thirty seconds to this, and leaves behind the Club Of Detonation, a +3 that will randomly trigger a fireball and do extra fire damage. There is only one key remaining. I am nearly out of spells, but I will see what comes out. I need my spells for what may lie below.

Oh, why why why did I have to do this? Why do I keep doing this to myself? A perfectly good opportunity had I to rest and regain my badly-needed spells. When I open the final lock, I am stunned by the number and grouping of enemies that appear: a Hive Mother Beholder, a Drow cleric, a Huntress archer, a dual-wielding female Kensai, a Succubus, and finally a Marileth, a huge six-armed snake-like female demon who has lost her brassiere. Out comes the Cloak Of Mirroring. I am nearly out of spells, but I still have one or two useful ones. However, I cast them. As soon as the Hive Mother's Anti-Magic Ray hits me my spellcasting is toast, as well as any spells I may have cast to protect myself.

And then, the now-familiar jolt back in time occurs to just before I twisted the key in the final lock. This time, I drink an Oil of Speed, raise a few Dire Wolves in strategic locations and cast Protection From Magical Weapons. I put on the Cloak Of Mirroring. I stand as far as I can from the lock to get that critical fraction of a second of time when I will need it, turn the key and sprint for the Hive Mother, hoping that her Anti-Magic Ray won't come immediately. (Oh no! I forgot to rest AGAIN!) The other close enemies do their best to injure me but with the abjuration up, I don't notice. I cast Imprisonment on the Hive Mother, struggling to maintain my composure and concentration as it is a long casting, even with the Robe Of Vecna, and when I see the familiar luminescence of closure, I know it was successful; I would not see anything otherwise and now there is no escape for the Hive Mother no matter what she does, or casts, or where she goes. A terrible situation to be in, but she attacked, I defended. I don't stand around to watch but sprint away at top speed made topper by the Oil and try to avoid the rest of the enemies.

For the next several hours, my life is a living hell of running, dodging, shooting, gulping the occasional healing potion and Oil Of Speed. There seems to be an unlimited number of Skeletons that can arise here. The Scorcher works wonders on reducing their numbers but after a while they are back up to what they were. I avoid the Succubus as the kiss of a Succubus is fatal, but she moves quickly; she also casts an unlimited number of Protection From Magical Weapons. Luckily the Huntress' arrows can't damage me; she runs out of them and comes after me with a two-handed sword. The Marileth is not something to get close to either, and can also cast Protection From Magical Weapons inordinately. The Drow Cleric casts far too many spells, such as Flamestrike and Insect Plague. Luckily between magic resistance and low saving throws I manage to avoid most of their effects. We reach sort of a draw, the enemies and I, between several powerful enemies with spellcasters that can do nothing to me, and myself, who isn't very powerful, as he has few spells.

The Kensai falls to the Scorcher; it is the only one of the enemies that it can hit. She regenerated so this took much longer than it would have otherwise, and she kept getting healed by the Cleric. For the others, I resort to the Pulser. It's still a very slow process. All of them have excellent armour classes. The Drow and her damned healing has to be the next to go, so I concentrate on her avoiding the rest as best I can, hardly able to get a shot off before having to run away again, and more skeletons appear. If I stand still for too long, they appear right around me, blocking my path out. Though their normal maces are harmless, they allow the other enemies to approach.

Finally, after what seems an eternity, the Marileth is the last to fall. Ugh... I thought this would never end. I am so tired of fighting and battles and death I can't begin to express it. Two Oils Of Speed and Improved Haste were used when one of the enemies was finally brought close to falling, and it still took longer than any battle I've fought since I took on Mencar Pebblecrusher in the Promenade with my high THAC0, normal sling and four hundred normal bullets. A mage without enough rest is nigh-useless.

So I rest. But the battles aren't over. Indeed, they have hardly begun.

Day 36
------
I only did one thing today, one thing worth writing about, at least. Still, I could go back to sleep if I wanted to; I've done a lifetime of work today.

It's not many days that one sends a Prince Of Demons back to the Abyss, for I was correct about that statue in the temple above.

When I entered the bottommost pit of the Keep, I found that a pit is exactly what it was: a circular floor of stone, with rising staircases about its edges to a platform where two portals stood. Dead portals; their oval passages hollow and showing the view beyond. No way out of here just yet. Huge steel manacles lay abandoned on that stone circle, chains of steel as thick as a man's wrist, the manacles opened, whatever they held gone... or was it? For a sound was echoing in my mind, a sound I had not heard for a good long time. When? I searched back... the sound had struck me as eerie and horrible when I heard it. I had heard it when the Matron Mother Ardulace offered up the blood I had gathered and the (substituted) eggs of Adalon to a Lord of the Abyss. And then I knew... knew I was not alone in this place. It was still here. HE was still here; I did not cast True Sight for no simple spell could make him appear against his will.

Instead, I merely spoke to him, spoke to the sound that ran through my brain at the centre of the pit, where the air seemed thicker and fear swirled in a silent and invisible tornado. And he answered without words in my mind telling me that the priests of Helm far above us, so far they might be an eternity and a universe away in their light-filled world, were false; they were worshippers of his who drew upon his power and entrapped a son of Bhaal here. Ahhh, cunning lying demon... I almost believed you. Your lies have been honed for a thousand years in this cruel cell awaiting the tread of the mortal feet of the beguiled. But I will fulfill the promise I made to the priests of Helm and read the scroll, though the voice tells me it is futile, challenges me to open the portals with the scroll... make the bonds stronger. Try! it dares me, and reaches for control of my thoughts, but I block it out and concentrate from years of spellcasting under duress on nothing but the scroll and the words thereon...

...and nothing happens. With a wisp of energy and the smell of failure, the scroll vanishes, but the voice without words that speaks imagery does not. Instead the images are different now: they are of Elmonster with a long gray beard wasting away in this place, then it is Elmonster dying of thirst and hunger on the cold stone floor, afraid to confront its occupant, afraid to dare the unseen Imprisoned One to show himself, and I realize I am being probed like a dead body for my weaknesses and fears and push the presence away. The fear leaves, only to be replaced with triumph. Elmonster lies to the false priests that the Imprisoned One is finished by his hand, then slays them all and those who oppose him, claims his rightful place given him by his divine blood, and the Imprisoned One rules at his side, the side of Throne Of Bhaal, the Throne Of Blood and Murder, as his greatest and most powerful servant and executor of the will to murder, for murder is sometimes an exact art but sometimes an art of the most grisly bloodlust and brutality, and no one can match this servant in those aspects; no master ever gave a command a servant would be more pleased to obey than this one. And again I feel that I am being charted and mapped, fed illusions to gauge my reactions, and I push the images away, and I push until there is no trace of the Imprisoned One left in my mind and draw up my plans for battle to compel my ignorance of the presence that will again assert itself should I lapse.

Enraptured by the presence, I had at first missed the silent bell, large enough to be a small building, that makes no sound at all. I suspect it gongs loudly in the ether where gods and such can hear it. An inscription dedicates it to Helm, and states that it will ring out when Helm is betrayed, and that his anger will burn like the sun. But I have no fear of this; I have not angered Helm. I have completed my mission, and I will have to do far more than was planned to finish it thoroughly. I have a destiny to complete, and it is neither of those that Demogorgon envisioned.

He will allow me to rest here, in this, his home and prison. And why not? He has nothing to fear from me. I might let a mouse rest in my presence without fear it was building energies in its mind like a bomb that it can unleash upon me instantly. After all, it is so small, and I so grand. As I did with the Ravager, I change most of my higher-level spells. I am sure to memorize Time Stop, Improved Alacrity, Chain Contingency, Energy Blades, three of Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wiltings, three of Pierce Shields, Protection From Energy, Spell Turning, several Mordenkainen's Swords, Protection From Magic Energy, two of Protection From Magical Weapons, three Tenser's Transformations, Greater Malison, four of Skull Traps, and three of Stoneskins. A specialized spellset for a specialized job. I don't end up using the Energy Blades, nor do I need more than one Tenser's or Stoneskin for the job itself, though I do use one afterwards. As with other difficult battles, I am not successful immediately. Sometimes it takes a few practices to perfect the steps in the dance of death, a few falters and tripping over one's feet before the rhythm is established, but it all works out. The calculating logic and precision is just the antidote for Demogorgon's chaos.

When I awaken, my first step in the dance is to cast Chain Contingency, as I did with the Ravager, and then cast all three Pierce Shields, placing their energies into it, and telling the Contingency to trigger on the first enemy it sees. I don't doubt he will also be resistant to the effects of Lower Resistance, so I don't bother with it. I approach the circle of stone at the edges, but stay between the large anchors where the manacle chains are securely fastened into rock to avoid being pinned by what will appear... like other enemies, Demogorgon does not wish a fair fight.

In succession, I Stoneskin, drink an Oil Of Speed, cast Spell Turning, Protection From Magical Energy, Protection From The Elements, and finally Protection From Magical Weapons. I face the unseen tornado of fear. I demand that it show itself, and finish this. It does. Demogorgon is nothing like I have seen from statues and illustrations: his tentacular arms are much longer and his twinned heads superficially resemble those of baboons, but this is an unnatural creature born of perhaps a thousand centuries of Abyssal powers and no comparison to the natural world is possible. Immediately after I see this form I am surrounded by demons: Marileths, Glabrezu, Baalors and an out-of place Cambion. Stormclouds vomit lightning into the pit; I must have been trapped in a Time Stop while he caused all of this to occur. But the spherical seething of energies at Demogorgon's midsection tells me that my Contingency was successful. I sprint as fast as humanly possible from the horde to the opposite side of the steps, and they pursue. I have a small amount of time before the Pierce Shields expire and Demogorgon is untouchable by magic. I ascend the stairs, not looking back, and between the portals leave a Mordenkainen's Sword for the pursuing hellspawn to attack, then scurry down the opposite steps whence I came.

Demogorgon is now almost alone, only a Cambion is near him, and a Glabrezu far away. My dance of death begins with Time Stop. Though Demogorgon is immune to it and shares my relative timeframe, like myself any effects he throws outside of his immediate become as frozen in time as the statues that his allies have become; I can focus on him alone. He can only try to attack me, but he is wasting time casting spells which halt mere steps in front of him. I waste no time; these four rounds are precious. My next step in the dance is Greater Malison, I approach Demogorgon and place all Four Skull Traps in such quick succession that they are almost instantaneous. He approaches me; I circle the still forms of his gated kin in such way that they are between he and I. I cast again; Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting, but at the Skull Traps, not at him. He follows, I circle, I cast, he follows, I circle, I cast again; the rhythm is solid, the dancer does not falter, the metronome counts off the seconds remaining in his time on the Prime Material...

He does not realize the energies that I have lain in this place, the bomb that I have set from my thoughts, possibly enough to slay a thousand average mortal humans, were they tightly packed onto the stone floor of this nigh-arena. Now I dance in a different direction, beckoning him to follow... the Time Stop has nearly expired and he is very close to the location of the Skull Traps. I clamp my hands over my ears...

With a roar of magical discharge, much of a day's worth of spells from an archmage detonates simultaneously with a surprised Demorgoron at the centre. He resists for a moment, then adds to the roaring himself as his form collapses; rays of brilliant light pour from him as do flames through burning paper: "THIS CANNOT BE!" I briefly shield my eyes with my arm as the brightness becomes unbearable and leaves afterimages in reds and blues, and when I dare to look again, he has vanished, along with several of those he brought here.

The few demonic creatures remaining are easily convinced to join their master by a Mordenkainen's Sword, and a jubilant Elmonster pretending he's a warrior through Tenser's Transformation. But the jubilance fades back to my usual thoughtful demeanour, and I search the area with my usual completeness. I find absolutely nothing; not a weapon, not a gem, not a single gold piece. My reward is greater than gold or items, and I will accept it as such.

I didn't want to kill Demogorgon, because I didn't really kill him, of course. Had I reforged his bonds, he could have remained imprisoned for a thousand more years before needing someone to undertake the task of renewing them again. Now, he has returned to the Abyss and will live again there, and in a century or so may be strong enough to return to smite the Prime. He will not make the same mistakes the next time; it will probably take far more than a single human wizard, or an army of them, to bring him down. Or, perhaps he now considers primes as underestimatedly dangerous and will never venture from the Abyss again.

This is confirmed by my final visit with the priests of Helm, where I finally get the whole truth out of them, and an unpleasant truth indeed. The scroll DID work. It resealed the prison of Demogorgon, with myself in it. The priest Odren's duty was supposed to be to reseal the prison with himself in it, not to trick a Bhaalspawn into doing it on the premise of helping him because he thought that Bhaalspawn were all deserving of a quick death. I merely measure his truthfulness by staring straight into eyes, and the eyes that stare back into mine are somewhat old, and somewhat tired, and more than a little frightened that I was able to return Demogorgon to the Abyss and return to confront him... but he does regret it, and he knows it was not the right thing to do, and that bell of Helm that tolls, Odren, tolls for thee... it is Helm's place to judge you, not mine. So I advise him to be more cautious in future and let him and his group depart in peace; he vows to speak my name for the rest of his days in a positive way for my actions, and then I am alone again, and the Keep is empty and only wind and birdsong can be heard.

I feel somewhat different after this long journey through the Keep and through that which makes up myself, and I know that my outlook has changed somewhat. The fire of righteous action that was lit in me burns still but in a more tempered way, more reasonable, and more understanding. What did I do to cause this shift recently? I was kind to Saladrex, and refused to kill him just because he was a Red Dragon. I tried to fulfill my duty to Helm and perform the ritual accurately, and displayed understanding to Odren. Less recently, I displayed kindness and understanding to my brother, and called him brother for the first time, and forgave him. I have never been a hateful man, killing is done only to defend my life or the lives of innocents, and I will always try to give others the benefit of the doubt, and try to talk my way through situations. Such is the essence of a neutral outlook on existence. But I still have done many things that would be called good as well, enough that should I try to list them all I should call myself boastful.

I begin to see things a bit more clearly now, being trapped as I am in a universe which could not exist without order, nor evolve without chaos. The line between void and stagnation is thin but a man can walk it without faltering if he has a mind to, and still be a good man at heart and strive to help his fellow sentient beings, human or otherwise... and I know I have shifted again and this new outlook seems the proper one to carry me through the rest of my days. For now I will help a fellow sentient being; I return to the almost-empty Keep and try to speak to Yakman and tell him that the threat is over and the demons are gone, but he is still beyond help. I make a note that I will send a healer of the mind to him when I can, when this is over.

I return with a heavy heart to the Abyss, knowing that this is the last time I will ever return here. So much has happened in this place that it has forced itself as a sort of home onto me, and yet I must destroy it to face the final challenge of Melissan and whatever infernal rage she may summon to prevent her downfall. I will not rest easy tonight.

First I speak to Sarevok, and I make sure that he will survive after this place ceases to exist. He assures me that he will, and his powerful determination will ensure it. I give him several of the finest weapons and armour that I can find, whatever he chooses, to start him out on his new life. He wonders why I am not bringing him to the battle to come; I assure him that I would, but that this is too much... I would not want to see him dead so soon after getting to know him and calling him brother. No, this is for me and me alone. If ever you find your wanderings unfulfilling, I tell him, Brynnlaw is where you will find a family and a home. And then I can say no more to him.

But there is one more still, and I speak to the Spirit Of Fate, and summon another "sibling" I have in the essence of Bhaal. When Imoen appears I am shocked as I never expected it to work over such distances and times, but she has been brought here as surely as I wished it. My mouth opens but no words come out. She looks at me, and I am ashamed that there is no resentment in her look. She seems happy to see me again though I was always cold and distant to her almost to the point of denying her completely; why couldn't she be angry with me so that I wouldn't feel so badly? She does not recognize Sarevok and this is probably for the best; she would not understand without a lengthy explanation how I could be consorting with the man who killed the only father I ever knew, but he was not the same Sarevok then.

When I finally speak, I am able to tell her that I am ashamed of the times that I treated her uncaringly and haughtily; time and hardship have changed me and I am no longer the same man... it all sounds so clumsy and I am stammering over my words like a two-penny stand-in, like that awful actor in the Bridge District of Athkatla that I watched ruin a good play. But with every stammer and flub, every loss for words, she smiles a little wider, and finally gives me a gentle hug, and I know that I have found a sister in the Bhaal essence, or at least a good friend, one who refused to give up on me, even when I gave up on her... and sometimes in doing so, on myself. By the time we have finished talking, rolling back the years for perhaps an hour or more, I have found that she took up the arts of the arcane herself and is of a respectable talent in magecraft, and I have told her she has a place in Brynnlaw anytime that she would choose to, helping me with my school and museum, and even, if she wants, running them when I am away. I would trust the effort of my life to anyone as loyal and unwavering as she. And as I did with Sarevok I provide to her anything that she could use from the collection of magical items that I have amassed.

And I find no trouble resting before my final confrontation, the final battle I hope that I will ever endure. Before I faced Irenicus, I had to find my father Gorion, my family, in my mind, but now I have a family here with me; there is no need to search for them. Cespenar is a faithful servant unto the end and all three of us are comfortable. Everything, for once, is how it should be, which is only fitting before a battle that may cost me my life. The forces that have given me second chances before may not be unlimited, and every mistake could be my last, so I relish these few idyllic times when they occur.

But I cannot help but wonder what will happen to Cespenar when this tiny region of the Abyss is gone, so I privately ask him, and have to content myself with his rather enigmatic answer that Bhaal's essence shall always exist, though many other gods would prefer it did not, and that even if I should remain a mortal man, in some unimaginably distant future, he will exist again, and shall scare notice the passage of aeons in oblivion, forever waiting for his next master.

And the thought of aeons of peace and oblivion is strangely comforting, so I rest easily, and awaken early. I empty the chests scattered about my living quarters this past month into the Bags Of Holding; the treasures of the Realms and the unique records and items of a most strange and interesting voyage disappear into the non-dimensional spaces I can carry about with me. I bid Sarevok and Imoen farewell. I try to keep it brief to avoid speculating about where I must go, and what I must do there, and do not wish to invoke undue emotion should I not return, instead departing casually as if my success were more than a slim chance.

Three approach the portal. They are three of the essence of Bhaal, in a time when this is becoming a rarity. Two of them know their destination: when this place ceases to exist, sprung from the mind of the third, they will find themselves at the last "real" place he departed from, on the parapets of Watcher's Keep. They have been instructed on the easiest route from there to Brynnlaw, if they accept the invitation to there, and also of the nearest towns and trade routes should their interests carry them to a different destination.

The third of the three does not know his destination. He could be flung into the vacuum of space for all he knows, or deep underground, or placed at the bottom of the sea. Yet he approaches in the same slow, methodical way as the others, having steeled himself to the necessity of carrying his task through to completion.

For the final time, the portal addresses him and he responds: "I am ready. It is time for the end."

Space enfolds upon itself as the three figures vanish, and the fires of the Abyss, constrained no longer by the fields that allowed the resilience of this place against their furies, leap forth and consume it utterly, wiping its existence from the very memory of the multiverse.

Day 39 - Epilogue
-----------------
I can barely write at the moment, but I am compelled to before everything that I have done in the past days is lost to memory. I have neglected my journal for some small time to return to my home as quickly as I could, and hope that I can recall a meaningful component of the details. Having just woken from nearly three days without rest, I am groggy but somewhat refreshed, and more importantly, relieved. It is over. I need never fear the consequences of being a Child of Bhaal again.

I have never encountered anything like the Throne Of Bhaal in all my days nor will I ever again; never have I been so utterly opposite in my imagination from the reality that I found. When one says the "Throne" of Bhaal, one expects like all thrones an ornate chair in a marble room upon a small dias or platform, but one is not thinking in the realms of the gods with such descriptions.

Instead, I found a vast cream-coloured disc floating on nothingness on a sea of inky blackness studded with pinpricks of light, as if I were among the stars, yet I was still in the Abyss according to what I was told.  Three smaller discs surrounded it, each containing a pool of energy. As tall as a tower, crowed with an almost-sphere of the same material as the disc upon which I stood supported by nothing at all, a cylindrical column of brilliant white light in the centre of the disc was the Throne itself. Within the column, the pretender to the Throne: Melissan, or more properly, and in her true guise, Amelyssan The Blackhearted, the priestess of Bhaal.

Was she easy to defeat? Yes, the first time. I was prepared for her and unloaded roughly the same sequence of spells that brought Demogorgon down. But Melissan could draw upon the essence of the Bhaalspawn she had stolen, disappearing back into the Throne Of Bhaal to recover, and return completely restored. While she was gone, I needed to defeat the guardians she left behind and cut off the pools from feeding the Throne and restoring her, which would bring her back to confront me again. This occurred three times, and I was drained of spells and could not rest in this place. Such unfairness of things...

The guardians were much easier than her, until the final four. I seem to remember that the first set were several Air Elementals. A single Mordenkainen's Sword held them off while I used the Pulser ammunition on them... had I not received those strange weapons from the gnomish smith Kerrick I should not know what to have done. I will seek him out if possible in future and reward him greatly for his generosity and thank him for saving my life, several times over, and allowing me to stop Bhaal's return. Oh, Improved Haste helped a lot. I used at least three castings of it, one from the Cloak and two from memory.

The second set of guardians were trolls and an Ice Golem with a Fireshield Blue. I think I am becoming more awake now and the details are beginning to come clear. For them I used the Scorcher, as they were all vulnerable to fire... yes, they were not too difficult at all.

The third set of guardians were insanely difficult compared, and I remember when battling them how fortunate I had been to take the same precautions as I did with Demogorgon: I had cast Protection From Magical Energy and Protection From Energy early on and it lasted the duration. Had I not done this, I would not have survived. There were two Marileths, a Succubus, an Alu-Fiend and a Fallen Solar... or was it a Fallen Planetar? My mind is still reeling and I should awaken more before I decide to write. I never had to take on one of these on before, whatever it was. Protection From Magical Energy saved me from its deadly arrows; they hit me but caused no injury, though they dispelled all of my protections. The Succubus could Dire Charm almost anything, my Mordenkainen's Swords included. I could not get close to the Fallen Solar or Planetar without it drawing its sword, and I had to keep away from the Marileths that were always near it. What did I do for that? I summoned a Planetar, yes, that was it. Cast Tenser's and used a Planetar, which only injured it but got the process started at least. Meanwhile I was using Improved Haste to keep the rate of fire up and keep away from everything else, especially the Succubus.

The most depressing part was when the Fallen Planetar (I'll settle on that possibility) healed itself. I was back to square zero. But I found that of all things, it was vulnerable to fire, so since it was immune to the bolts of the Scorcher, I instead fired at the Alu-Fiend that it could hit, and passed the fire column through the Fallen Planetar, and kept up the heat until it was dead. I was very, very pleased when it finally collapsed and died as I knew that I could win this. I turned the Pulser on the Marileths; they healed themselves almost as fast I could injure them... almost, but not quite. The Alu-Fiend fell to the Staff which provided immunity to her Charm. The Succubus I didn't want to get close to for the kiss of one is fatal, so I used the Wand Of Monster Summoning. A frustrating battle ensued as she would become invisible, and I had no True Sight. When she became visible, she would go invisible and then lose morale when Badly Injured, until her regeneration had made her gain back most of the damage. Very tricky, but eventually she went down.

All the while between these battles I had to face Amelyssan and her summons and excessive ninth-level spells: Timestop, Spellstrike and so forth, over and over. The worst of them were the Slayer Shadows. I was able to use Time Stop the first time to stop the Slayer Shadows dead in their tracks while I concentrated on Amelyssan. Another time, she summoned both Bone Fiends and Slayer Shadows and came after me herself. I was helpless, having very few spells left. Luckily I had a Mordenkainen's Sword to hold most of the Slayer Shadows off. I let the Bone Fiends circle me as I was immune to their attacks, and they acted as a shield keeping the remaining Slayer Shadows and Melissan away from me. I had Improved Haste and Tenser's active and I pummeled Amelyssan with the Pulser until she had to retreat to the Throne and heal again... I was so close that time...

Before the final encounter, I know she would be at her worst, most difficult. I played the trump card: drinking a Potion Of Insight to raise my Wisdom, I cast Wish off of the scroll of it I had found in Watcher's Keep and wisely declined to sell, for just such an occasion, and it saved my life as surely as I am writing this. A nine thousand gold piece scroll vanished into a haze of energy, and it was worth every last piece of it. When a Djinn appeared following the casting, I was able to wish to have rested in this place I cannot rest, and all my spells were rememorized.

In the final confrontation with Melissan, I pulled out all the stops. I used the same pattern of Protection From Magical Weapons before causing her to reappear by cutting off the energy from the final pool from the Throne, unloading a Chain Contingency loaded with three Pierce Shields on her, casting Time Stop followed by Improved Alacrity and then pummeling her with Skull Traps and Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wiltings. When the Time Stop expired and the bomb went off, I was a free man, free of this nightmare of my heritage, free of the endless battles, pain and hardship, sleeping on cold stone dungeon floors, eating awful food from my pack, never knowing which next pain pit I would call home for the night, and killing the Realms' most malevolent and bizarre creatures before they dined on me. Free...

When Amelyssan reached the brink of death, she did not die. Instead, the Solar from my former Abyssal subplane appeared and prevented her final death, telling us that it was over, and that I was victorious. Amelyssan took this decision as well as could be expected: very poorly and childishly. I then had a choice to make, and although I had always known if I ever had this choice what my answer would be, it still took me a minute to decide, for my better nature to speak, and to make my final decision.

Who among us can say that they were offered the chance to be a god, to be immortal, and refused? Why, many may ask, would anyone who had this chance refuse it? To live forever, to never grow old, to be more powerful than any mortal... these are the aspirations of millions and perhaps one in a million will ever achieve it.

But those who would shake their heads in wonder have not walked in my shoes and known the essence of Bhaal as I have. I had considered the possibility long before this, should the thinner-than-thin chance ever have come to pass, when I discovered my heritage and what it could do for me... and to me. I do not wish to draw on Bhaal's power in any way; it is as double-edged and sharp as his murdering daggers, and it will cut deeply its target and wielder alike. I reject such an entity as my father in every way. My father was Gorion of Candlekeep, a just, kindhearted and noble human being, who died to save my life. I will forever hold him as the greatest, truest father a man could ever have and hold up all that I have accomplished in the hopes I can see in it one half of the man he was.

And what would I do as a mere lesser power, drawing on the essence of Bhaal? Cyric, a greater god far more powerful than most other gods, who has lusted after Bhaal's essence would surely see in me merely another obstacle and draw his plans against me, as would others of his ilk in the pantheon... and with myself as a new lesser power I would have hardly any options to withstand them. Would I be on my guard forevermore? Watching my every move lest I find myself distracted and an avatar blade shoved through me, my blood poisoning a river? Bah! This would be no different than sleeping with one eye open in a dungeon for fear of ambush. This is no way to live, and a sentence without a parole when one's life is unlimited in duration.

And how would I remain a power? Powers without worshippers fade to nothingness... I remember the lost Amaunator, once the god of light; such importance! and yet he faded. When his worshippers were gone, he waned nearly to nothingness. Worshippers? I could not stand such a thing. When a person talks to me, I want to look them full in the face as equals. This prostrating and fawning over me would make me nauseous; I want none of it, and I cannot understand the mechanics of our universe that it requires this stroking of the impossibly large yet eggshell-fragile ego to remain a godly figure.

And so I say: no, no, a thousand times no. Let the essence of Bhaal be conveyed to a place of the trustworthy gods and forever sealed away from the prying assassin's fingers of Cyric, and let me return home as a mortal man with his feet planted firmly on earth, who can treat others as his friends and speak to them without their heads hung in the shame of being mere human beings, who need never look for death around every dark corner. I will take my remaining years of enjoyment and tranquility over an eternity of paranoia and the petty politics of the cosmos. I turned down godliness; is a happy remainder of my life too much to ask to substitute in its place? To many, this would seem like such a lesser request, but to me it is much greater.

The essence is withdrawn from me and I know finally that I am no longer of Bhaal in any way. As space enfolded in the Abyss so it does here: as I vanish from this place the last sight I have of it is the great column of light being extinguished, and the crown of the Throne suspended so high above crashing down into it, smashing the form of Amelyssan, still greedily crawling over it like an insect, into a thousand shreds, and then the entire central disc explodes into nothingness; I feel nothing, as if I were not here at all, and I lose consciousness...

When I awoke, a female face was inches from mine. As my vision became less clouded, I could see it was Imoen. She waited for my return all of this time... as the blurriness receded further, I could see the white clouds in azure sky beyond her, and looking around further, stone walls became apparent. She asked me whether I was alright, concern written deeply into her face causing her to look a little older. Her breath was like roses. I was back on the parapets of Watcher's Keep, the last place I had stood on the Prime Material before my final journey to the Abyss. I croaked in reply as best I could that I was fine, and half a decade fell from her face like morning dew in sunshine when she smiled.

But where was Sarevok? He was gone... gone, as I read in the letter he had scribbled hastily for me, to reshape himself anew, and forge a destiny that had almost been denied him forever. He would return if and when he had carved out his place in the world with the blade I had given him, but it would be a different place this time. He would join the heroes of these Realms, his ugly past forgotten, his fiery chaos and enormous endurance and natural strength turned now to serve a better purpose. When the Bhaal essence left me, I was later to find, it left Imoen and Sarevok as well, and they simultaneously cried out and knew that something deep within, hidden for all their lives inside them like an undeveloped twin was gone forever, and as if through a revelation did Sarevok then begin scribbling the note to me, saying farewell to Imoen, and departing. Although no clue was left in the letter, he gave his destination to Imoen to pass on to myself upon my return, though she did not understand it: Kara-Tur, Tamoko. And so he was gone to fulfill his promise to return the ashes of his love to her homeland.

I could not wait any longer to return home, and left Watcher's Keep on the most direct route I knew of to Athkatla, to charter whatever I could find to return to Brynnlaw, and Imoen had been intrigued enough by my offer to want to accompany me there. I did not stop, though days passed. When I stumbled into view of Athkatla half-awake, I was carrying Imoen in my arms for she could not keep her eyes open nor match my determined, mechanical pace any longer; she seemed to weigh almost nothing with the Girdle giving me the strength sufficient to march for hours with half a ton on my back. Yet I almost dropped her in the shock of my eyes first meeting the city I had spent so much time in, at first against my will: Athkatla, with her glorious temples and her bustling Promenade, was in many places reduced to little more than ruins.

I had heard of the taking of Athkatla before this, but not that it was in many places leveled, and I had not passed through on my way to Suldanessellar when the prophecy required me. The dispossessed were everywhere, most of the authorities dead, and chaos ruled the streets while the thin contingent of remaining guards strove to keep the place orderly. The city had been sacked by a Bhaalspawn I had never heard of; small blessing that Yaga-Shura had taken the life of whoever it was who perpetrated this... and the mercenaries of this Bhaalspawn had taken the life of Ginia, just as I was beginning to fall in...

...and I looked downward at Imoen, sleeping, cradled in my arms... and suddenly I felt it. Could it be? But she is my sister. No: she WAS my sister, and only in the essence of Bhaal. Now I am no Bhaalspawn and she neither; I searched my memory; she arrived at Candlekeep at a different time than I did according to Gorion and Winthrop and others. We could not be of the same mother, and as a boy and a girl in close proximity approaching the age of maturity there is no way that this would have been kept hidden from us, lest we have engaged in a secret relationship unknowing we were related. And Bhaal's children were purely of the races of their mothers; I had met enough pure halfling and dwarven Bhaalspawn to know this, so they were not related by blood at all... this all seemed too coincidental: Ginia's death, my changes in my outlook on the world and my personality, Imoen's return to me as a mage akin to myself, our loss of our Bhaal essence leaving us unrelated, and my discovery of that which I had been missing all along through her unswaying loyalty and unfortunately once-unappreciated happiness to be near me, and...

A word came into my mind...it is a word whose meaning I distrust and refute, but it spoke clearly and quietly all the same: Destiny.

And somewhere in the heights of the multiverse's cosmos, a Solar smiled down at the man who could have been a god, but chose instead to remain a mortal, and ensured that he suffered not for his decision, and he knew then and thereafter in his heart that his choice was an inspired one; suddenly it had become clear to him in crystalline precision that he would have a life fulfilling enough that he would never regret his decision, and he need never fear or want for anything again.

A mage clad in colourful robes, cradling a pretty, sleeping young woman strode through the populous, clamorous streets of the ruined city, but the crowds interfered with the pair not, as if an invisible hand forced them to keep their distance. Though he bore a heavy pack and the sleeping young woman, his step was as brisk as an unburdened man's, as if a great weight had been forever lifted from him. Soon he would return to this city at its revitalized council's request to help in its reconstruction and the formation of an incorruptible and benign group of wizardly peacekeepers. Somewhat later would he return to his childhood home of Candlekeep to complete the inquest that led to the exile from there of Ulraunt and the conferring of the title of Keeper Of The Tomes on Tethtoril, but for the moment, Brynnlaw called him too strongly to be resisted, especially by one so exhausted from travel. Though the docks were nearly useless in many places and many pilings askew, few ships available and the demand for them great, he encountered no difficulty chartering for a reasonable fare to Brynnlaw, and if one could read his mind at that moment, he would be thinking of nothing more than to collapse in exhaustion for perhaps twelve hours into his berth, after gently placing the young woman to rest in hers, and then upon awakening, to reflect on all that had happened before it blurred together and faded from his mind as one long event, to write many pages in the little book he carried everywhere with him while looking over the wide sea at the far horizon, searching for the first glimpse of his home. And if one noticed carefully, one could almost see at this distance the sleeping figure stir in his arms and kiss him lightly as he arose the gangplank to the deck, then disappeared into the wooden hull of the vessel.

"The Lord Of Murder shall perish..."
-- Alaundo The Wise, prophet and founder of Candlekeep

THE END